Book Two: Theory
----------------

Watering Down the Dharma
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I have been accused of “watering down the dharma.” By defining an
*arahat* (also *arhat* and *arahant*) as someone who has “gotten off the
ride” and can see experience as process, as opposed to a cartoon saint,
I have ruffled more than a few feathers. Here are some questions, along
with my responses:

    Why are you redefining the Four Paths of Theravada Buddhism?

There is an old joke in which a man is asked, “Do you still beat your
wife?” The person being asked is put into an untenable situation by the
false assumption built into the question. The assumption is that you
have beaten your wife in the past. If you answer “no,” the questioner
will follow up with “when did you stop?”

Best to reject the question entirely.

    Why are you redefining the Four Paths?

I reject the question. It is false to assume that there is One Right Way
to interpret ancient texts, providing an infallible orthodoxy against
which all other interpretations must be compared and inevitably found
lacking. There is no One Right Way.

The authors who penned the early Buddhist texts are no longer available
for comment. We can only guess at their intentions. Modern commentators
who insist that they know the original meaning of *arahat* are
overplaying their hand, regardless of how scholarly or ostensibly
traditional their arguments.

Like everyone else who has an opinion about this, I am simply throwing
my hat into the ring; I offer one possible interpretation of the Four
Paths model. This interpretation is based on the Pali Canon and
commentaries, rooted in observed reality, and nurtured by pragmatism.
Implausible claims are sooner discarded than taken at face value. But
even after discarding the implausible, the unprovable, and the downright
silly, what is left is too good to ignore; enlightenment is much more
than a myth, it happens to real people in our own time, and it can be
systematically developed through known practices.

It seems likely that the Buddhist definition of “fully enlightened”
changed over time in a kind of slow motion frenzy of one-upmanship. Here
is a passage from palikanon.com, attributed to W.G. Weeraratne, author
of several books on Buddhism and editor-in-chief of the prodigiously
researched Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, published by the government of Sri
Lanka:

    In its usage in early Buddhism the term [arahant] denotes a person
    who had gained insight into the true nature of things
    (yathābhūtañana). In the Buddhist movement the Buddha was the first
    arahant… The Buddha is said to be equal to an arahant in point of
    attainment, the only distinction being that the Buddha was the
    pioneer on the path to that attainment, while arahants are those who
    attain the same state having followed the path trodden by the
    Buddha. http://www.palikanon.com/english/pali_names/ay/arahat.htm

Note that “insight into the true nature of things” sounds as though it
might be within reach of anyone. (In a moment, we’ll discuss what the
early Buddhists believed this “true nature” to be.) And indeed it was
not the least bit unusual for people practicing the Buddha's system to
become “fully enlightened arahats” according to early Buddhist texts.
But look what happened next:

    But, as time passed, the Buddha-concept developed and special
    attributes were assigned to the Buddha. A Buddha possesses the six
    fold super-knowledge (chalabhiññā); he has matured the thirty-seven
    limbs of enlightenment (bodhipakkhika dhamma); in him compassion
    (karunā) and insight (paññā) develop to their fullest; all the major
    and minor characteristics of a great man (mahāpurisa) appear on his
    body; he is possessed of the ten powers (dasa bala) and the four
    confidences (catu vesārajja); and he has had to practise the ten
    perfections (pāramitā) during a long period of time in the past.

    When speaking of arahants these attributes are never mentioned
    together, though a particular arahant may have one, two or more of
    the attributes discussed in connection with the Buddha (S.II.217,
    222). In the Nidāna Samyutta (S.II.120-6) a group of bhikkhus who
    proclaimed their attainment of arahantship, when questioned by their
    colleagues about it, denied that they had developed the five kinds
    of super-knowledge—namely, psychic power (iddhi-vidhā), divine ear
    (dibba-sota), knowledge of others' minds (paracitta-vijānana), power
    to recall to mind past births (pubbenivāsānussati) and knowledge
    regarding other peoples' rebirths (cutū-papatti)—and declared that
    they had attained arahantship by developing wisdom (paññā-vimutti).
    http://www.palikanon.com/english/pali_names/ay/arahat.htm

Hmmm… So it looks as though the meanings of the words *Buddha* and
*arahat* changed over time, with more and more powers and attributes
layered on. Eventually, the lists of things arahats could do and the
lists of things they had left behind became so long that no living
person, past or present could reasonably be expected to make the cut.
This is where we find ourselves today, assuming we believe the currently
popular (among Buddhists) kitchen-sink version of enlightenment.

Let's go back to the beginning for a moment.

    In its usage in early Buddhism the term [arahat] denotes a person who had gained insight into the true nature of things.

It would be useful to know what the early Buddhists may have meant by
the “true nature of things.” Here is more from Weeraratne:

    At the outset, once an adherent realised the true nature of things,
    i.e., that whatever has arisen (samudaya-dhamma) naturally has a
    ceasing-to-be (nirodhā-dhamma), he was called an arahant…
    http://www.palikanon.com/english/pali_names/ay/arahat.htm

Are you seeing what I’m seeing? Not only is full enlightenment
(arahatship) a perfectly reasonable thing for ordinary people to aspire
to and attain, the Buddha himself was initially considered just another
enlightened man, albeit the first of his group. All that was required
was to see that anything that “has arisen, naturally has a
ceasing-to-be.” (And may I humbly submit that this is precisely what I
mean when I advocate learning to see this experience as process. While
trivial as a mere concept, the ability to see this in real time is
life-changing.) I find this empowering beyond words. Although I would be
perfectly willing to dispense with Buddhism entirely if it did not have
anything to offer us at this point in our history, I love the fact that
2500 years ago, humans discovered a technology for mental development
that still works today. And I love the fact that once you strip away the
accretions of thousands of years of can-you-top-this storytellers, it
all seems perfectly do-able to us ordinary folks. It *is* perfectly
do-able, of course, and this is my entire point.

In interpreting ancient Buddhist maps, it is necessary to begin with a
few assumptions. Here are mine: I begin with the assumption that the
chroniclers of early Buddhism were pointing to something that was
happening around them (or to them), but were limited by the obligatory
biography-as-hagiography storytelling style of their day. I continue
with the assumption that what was possible in the 5th Century BCE is
still possible today. Next, I strip away the implausible and preserve
the plausible. It is implausible that ancient meditators defied gravity,
traveled through time, performed miracles, or overcame their human
biology. On the other hand, it is plausible that awakening, as it was
then understood, was commonplace among meditators in the time of the
Buddha. (A common theme of early Buddhist documents is that nearly
everyone who did the Buddha's practice became fully enlightened.) I
conclude that there is an organic process of development that results
from meditation. It need not be mystical or magical, and we can just as
easily think of it as brain development. Finally, and most importantly,
I reality-test these assumptions with observations of present day
humans, using my subjective experience, interviews with other
meditators, and the carefully documented reports of present-day
meditators available in books and online forums.

Before I present a side-by-side comparison of two competing models of
arahatship, we might reasonably ask whether a stage model of
contemplative development has any value at all. I believe it does.
Humans learn best when they are given discreet goals and regular
assessments of progress. I have heard the protestations of those who
believe that meditation must never be a goal-oriented activity, and that
this holy truth renders all stage models either counterproductive or
irrelevant. I refer such people to the success of my students. And for
those who crave a more authoritative (authoritarian?) voice, I would
point out that according to that most definitive of Buddhist sources,
the Pali Canon, the dying words of the Buddha were “Strive diligently.”

We can compare and contrast my model (let's call it the *Pragmatic
Model*) with a model that is currently in vogue among Buddhists, and
which we might reasonably call the *Saint Model*. First, the
definitions:

The Pragmatic Model of Arahatship
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These people know they are done; they have come to the end of seeking.
Although they may continue to meditate with great enthusiasm, and
continue to deepen and refine important aspects of their understanding
throughout their lives, they do not feel there is anything they need to
do vis a vis their own awakening. This is in marked contrast to the
pre-arahat meditator, who tends to be obsessed with meditation and
progress. Equally important, the Pragmatic Model arahat is able to see
experience as process. There is no enduring sense of self at the center
of experience. The Buddhist ideal of insight into not-self has been
completely realized and integrated.

The Saint Model of Arahatship
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This person does not suffer. No negative emotion is felt *or expressed*.
Ever. (I have emphasized the *expression* of negative emotions because
there will always be individuals who claim not to feel negative emotions
even while expressing them in a way that is obvious to everyone around
them. Doesn't count.) No anger, resentment, annoyance, irritation,
aversion, impatience, or restlessness is allowed. There is no sensual
desire, and this applies to both food and sex. This person cannot
compare himself/herself with others, either favorably or unfavorably.
This person is unable to lie, steal, speak harshly, or kill a sentient
being, including insects. Did I mention omniscience and diverse psychic
powers including mind reading? This person is a saint by the most
rigorous interpretation of the word.

Comparing the models
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For a developmental model to be relevant to modern humans, it should
describe something that actually happens and can be observed today. It
should happen often enough to form a reasonable sample size for study.
The Pragmatic Model does this. I estimate that I have communicated with
20-30 people who might be considered arahats by this model. Since I
personally know only a tiny fraction of the humans on Earth, it is
reasonable to assume that this is only the tip of the iceberg, and there
are many hundreds or thousands of such people whom I have not yet met.

By contrast, the Saint Model is a high bar indeed. I have never met
anyone who could approach it, in spite of the fact that in the natural
course of my life, first as dedicated seeker, and later as meditation
teacher, I have met many highly accomplished and/or revered meditators.
As for dead saints, in many cases there is little record of the
phenomenology of their day-to-day experience, either subjective or as
observed by others. In cases where there *is* such a record, candidates
are quickly eliminated from the Saint Model for displaying or reporting
unseemly amounts of human behavior.

A useful model describes a repeatable process and has clear metrics for
success. The Pragmatic Model identifies specific phenomena that are
experienced by the meditator at each stage along a typical sequence of
events. (See, for example, the Progress of Insight section of this book,
and my criteria for attainment of each of the Four Paths.) The Saint
Model, on the other hand, does not offer clear metrics for success,
either in the beginning or the middle. In the end, you will know you
have achieved it because you will never experience or express
irritation, and you will lose your enjoyment of food.

The Hercules Effect: Why “watering down” a high standard might be a good idea
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In Greco-Roman mythology, Hercules was the very embodiment of physical
fitness. He did a great deal of slaying and capturing in his illustrious
career, and even had time to hold up the world for a moment when Atlas
needed a break. Hercules was invincible and almost infinitely strong.
Compared to Hercules, the most decorated athletes of our own day are
scarcely worth mentioning. Hercules would outbox Mike Tyson with one
hand while simultaneously defeating Serena Williams at tennis and
Michael Jordan (in his prime!) at basketball. Are we watering down our
definition of physical fitness by not believing in Hercules? Or are we
simply acknowledging that Hercules is but a myth and is therefore not
relevant to us as we probe the limits of human excellence?

Similarly, we can dispense with the myth of enlightened sainthood and
concentrate on what actually happens to flesh and blood humans when they
meditate. We can define enlightenment/awakening in a way that comports
with observed reality. A four paths model that is teachable and
learnable is infinitely more interesting than one that never happens. We
stopped believing in Hercules some time ago. Perhaps it's time to stop
believing in magical cartoon saints. This is an eminently practical
step, as letting go of our fantasies allows us to focus on meditation in
earnest. And effective meditation practice allows us to realize the
remarkable benefits of awakening for ourselves, rather than through the
intermediary of an imagined champion.

Fluency with the the Ladder of Abstraction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Neuroscience informs us that everything we experience is a
representation in the brain. We have no direct pipeline to the external
world. I see a wall across the room. It is beige, with white trim, and
littered with purple sticky notes in book outline form. But my
experience of that wall is a mental construct based on photons hitting
my eyes or pressure sensations hitting my fingers. Some mystics have
intuitively realized this and concluded that external reality is
therefore an illusion. I find this conclusion fallacious. I have every
reason to believe that 20 years from now other people will still be able
to see and touch the wall across the room, and cover it with their own
sticky notes. The external world is not an illusion. But my experience
of it is an abstraction. What this means is that even when I go as low
as possible on a ladder of abstraction, it is *still* an abstraction.
Fine. Fair enough. For our purposes, it is sufficient to identify a
continuum of abstraction from lower to higher.

Lower levels of abstraction are, by definition, more grounded in the
five physical senses. Higher levels allow the naming of things,
memories, projections of imaginary worlds, and manipulation of concepts.
Dogs, cats, birds, lizards, and snails have access to lower levels of
abstraction, but cannot go as high as we can on the ladder. They can
experience input from the five senses, and create a mental
representation of their environment. Some non-human animals can even
abstract to the level of assigning labels to things. But they presumably
cannot do math or spin multiple elaborate scenarios about the future.
They cannot be architects or diagnosticians. The ability to move high on
the ladder of abstraction is uniquely human (at least on this planet)
and it has served us well. We are fruitful. We multiply. And there is
the individual payoff; if you can out-plan your neighbor, you will
prosper. But there is a cost. There is a cost! Higher levels of
abstraction are inherently agitating. We are happy to pay the cost
because the payoff is so great. Still… the cost. Our inability to return
to low levels of abstraction makes us sick and kills us early. We are
awash in a sea of stress and anxiety. We must re-learn the art of
climbing back down the ladder of abstraction. We must learn to be simple
sometimes. Not all the time. Sometimes. One of the benefits of
meditation, one of the specialties held under the over-arching umbrella
of contemplative fitness, is the art of simplicity. To go low on the
ladder of abstraction. To breathe. To relax.

With this in mind, we can identify *fluency* as a core value and a core
competency within contemplative fitness. We can train ourselves to
access the ladder of abstraction in its entirety, from low to high, and
back down again.

The three speed transmission
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The three speed transmission is a conceptual framework for understanding
the ways in which contemplative practices from various traditions
complement one another. It grew out of my need to make sense of the
different, often contradictory teachings and techniques I encountered
from various contemplative traditions and teachers. Think of it as a
tree to hang your knowledge on. It will help you organize your thoughts.
This kind of knowledge tree is called a schema. Here is the three speed
transmission schema in a nutshell:

1. First gear: What?
2. Second gear: Who?
3. Third gear: Stop practicing; this is it.

At a slightly higher level of detail, here it is again:

1. First Gear: Bring attention to the experience of this moment.
   Objectify (take as object) the simple phenomena of the six sense
   doors, which are seeing, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling, and
   thinking. Pure concentration practices also fall under the First Gear
   heading.
2. Second Gear: Bring attention to the apparent knower of this
   experience. Typical guiding questions are “Who am I?” or “To whom is
   this happening?”
3. Third Gear: This is it. It's over. Surrender to the situation as it
   is in this moment. Then, go beyond even surrender, to the simple
   acknowledgement that this moment is as it is, with or without your
   approval. Even your effort to surrender is a presumption, a
   last-ditch effort to control the situation; by agreeing to surrender,
   you imply that you have a choice, as though you could choose *not* to
   surrender. This is not so. You are not in charge. You are the kid in
   the the back seat with the plastic steering wheel. This moment is
   already here and nothing you can do or not do in this moment will
   change it.

Here is a third iteration of the schema with a partial list of practices
that correspond to each gear:

1. First gear:

  1. Vipassana meditation, with or without following the breath, noting
     aloud or silently, Burmese Mahasi-style, interactively or alone; body
     scanning vipassana, as taught in the U Ba Kin/Goenka tradition of
     Burma.
  2. Pure concentration practices like mantra (repeating a word); gazing
     at an object; counting the breath; repeating metta (lovingkingdness)
     or compassion phrases; focusing on feelings of metta or compassion;
     concentrating on a conceptual object, i.e., visualization of deities,
     lights, or physical objects.
  3. Ecstatic dancing, whirling, or speaking in tongues.

2. Second gear:

   - Self-enquiry as taught in Advaita Vedanta; hua tou as taught in
     Chinese Zen (Chan) and Korean Zen (Seon).

3. Third Gear:

   - Shikantaza (just sitting), as taught in Japanese Soto Zen; turning
     toward the “un-manifest” as in Mahamudra or Dzogchen practices; “Just
     stop!” as taught by Advaita teacher Poonja-ji. Being reminded by a
     teacher that you are “already enlightened” or that you “cannot do it
     wrong,” as taught by some neo-advaita teachers, e.g., Ganga-ji,
     Mooji.

When I first became interested in contemplative practice, I read a
number of Zen books that made reference to “awakening” or
“enlightenment.” It seemed to be some nebulous sort of wisdom that Zen
masters had. The reader was often encouraged to abandon the quest for
enlightenment, even though enlightenment was clearly the goal. If one
could just adopt the right attitude, enlightenment would arise; but if
you tried to “get” it, you would fail. Paradox was everywhere. The
aspirant must understand that there is “nowhere to go, nothing to get.”
That sort of thing. It was never clear to me how I could duplicate this
highly touted but under-explained wisdom in my own life. As a westerner
who did not have access to traditional Japanese culture, and who grew up
with the understanding that learning resulted from a fairly
straightforward process of education, I found the Zen approach less than
helpful.

Since I never felt called to put on a black robe and join a Zen center,
I was on my own. I didn’t know how to develop my meditation practice
other than to read books about it and sit for thirty minutes a day
counting my breath from one to ten (a practice I had learned from a Zen
book). I sensed progress in my meditation practice throughout this time,
but I had the distinct feeling that I was missing something and that my
practice was inefficient.

When I met Bill Hamilton in 1990, he told me about the Theravada
Buddhist four paths of enlightenment and the Progress of Insight map.
During this time, I also learned that according to the Pali suttas, the
dying words of the Buddha were “appamadhena sampadetha,” which means
“strive diligently.”

This linear, goal-oriented approach made sense to me, given my own
cultural influences, and I was immediately able to put this simple
concept to work; the more I practiced, the more I progressed. Thirty
minutes a day was not enough; I practiced more, understanding that
progress was proportional to time spent training. And technique
mattered; Mahasi-style mental noting, with its built-in feedback loop
and systematic way of including all aspects of experience, was sure to
be more efficient than simple breath-counting. “*Aha!*” I thought.
“*There is somewhere to go and something to get.*” It was clear that
the Pali Buddha [*Although both the Pali and Sanskrit texts are
ostensibly about the same historical figure, the pictures painted by
these collections of stories diverge; the Buddha of the Pali Canon is
fierce, clear in his communication, and uncompromising in his dedication
to excellence while the Buddha of the Sanskrit texts often appears
easy-going and vague. This is what I mean when I say “Pali Buddha” or
“Sanskrit Buddha.*] wasn't into this nebulous “you can't get there from
here” baloney at all. My practice took off like a rocket. Here was a
straightforward, systematic pedagogy, and it worked. Vipassana seemed to
make Zen irrelevant. But that wasn't the end of the story.

In the early nineties, while living and meditating intensively in a
Burmese-style Mahasi monastery in Malaysia, I met an American Zen
practitioner who said that the Burmese vipassana approach was
wrong-headed and that the Zen people had it right after all. He insisted
that the striving that was part and parcel of the Burmese vipassana
scene was just the initial practice and that eventually you had to grow
up, stop banging your head against the wall and let things be as they
are. I spent many hours arguing with this fellow, but it was clear to me
that he had a valid point of view that wasn't being expressed by my
Burmese teachers. I chewed on this for several years, flip-flopping
between thinking that the Burmese were right and the Japanese clueless,
and then deciding that the Japanese were right after all, and so on.

In the early and mid 2000s, I became fascinated with Advaita Vedanta and
the process of self-enquiry as taught by Ramana Maharshi and
Nisargadatta. Here was yet another lens: you didn't have to pay
attention to anything other than the apparent self, and by asking the
question “who am I?” you could deconstruct this sticky illusion and lose
the sense of self forever, essentially solving all of your problems.
Self-enquiry had the benefit of simplicity; rather than the myriad
changing objects of vipassana, there was only one. It was arguably
harder to get lost while meditating, since the task was to keep the
attention firmly on the question “who am I?” From the point of view of
Advaita, neither Zen breath-counting, nor Zen surrender, nor Burmese
vipassana have much to offer;[*In all fairness to the vast and
multi-faceted Zen tradition, self-enquiry is emphasized in Korean Zen
(Seon or Son), and some schools of Chinese Zen (Chan).*] it's all about
directly investigating the apparent self. All questions are immediately
redirected to self-enquiry. Who cares what is happening? Only ask to
whom it is happening. The recursion of this approach creates a practice
that is both elegantly simple and completely self-contained. I liked it,
and I jumped into the practice with both feet; my pendulum swung again
and I became dismissive of both Zen and vipassana. Ramana Maharshi
became my hero and I spat on anyone who wasn't hip enough to practice
self-enquiry to the exclusion of all else.

For many years, I was unable to see how these perspectives could be
reconciled; I gravitated toward whatever felt right at the time and
declared it the best and only practice. Again and again I was blinkered
by the narrowness of my own perspective. Gradually, though, my viewpoint
began to broaden. I could no longer deny that all of these seemingly
contradictory systems had value, and more specifically that I had
benefited from all of them.

I needed a conceptual framework big and flexible enough to hold the
striving of the Pali Buddha, the self-enquiry of Advaita, and the
surrender of Zen. I put them in that order, i.e., 1) “What?” as in “what
is happening?” 2) “Who?” as in “to whom is it happening” and 3) “Stop
practicing because this is it.” The three speed transmission was born.
And by about 2005, I was able to see a way to integrate all three
understandings into a method, using one to scaffold the next. The three
speed transmission allows us to step back and see the bigger picture,
allowing for the possibility that any given perspective can have great
value within its sphere and that there is no one lens to rule them all.

In the end, there is no hierarchy. “Stop practicing because this is it”
is not a higher-level understanding than the simple reality of the six
sense doors (seeing, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling, and
thinking), as viewed through vipassana noting practice. Nor is
self-enquiry to be privileged over either of the other lenses. In fact,
the ability to switch fluently among lenses is a hallmark of mature
practice and mature understanding. There is no one lens to rule them
all. As Croatian Buddhist teacher Hokai Sobol says, “every perspective
both reveals and obscures.” Each lens is valid within its sphere, and
effective practice becomes a simple and practical matter of applying the
appropriate lens in any given moment.

The three speed transmission approach encourages you to adopt whatever
lens is most helpful in a particular situation. If you observe the
comings and goings of your own experience, you can see thoughts and body
sensations arising and passing away. All of these phenomena can be
perceived *out there*; I can see the computer in front of me, the man
sitting at the next table in the coffee shop; I can hear the
conversations going on around me, the background music playing through
the sound system; I can taste my coffee; I can recognize my own thoughts
and internal dialogue as I think of these examples. The practice of
looking at the objects of the six senses [*Buddhist theory identifies
six senses: seeing, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling, and thinking.
In this system, thinking is the sixth sense. It is valuable to see
experience this way as it counters the tendency to privilege thinking as
somehow more "me" then other phenomena. Ultimately, all phenomena,
including the momentarily arising sense of "I" share equal status; none
is to be privileged over any other.*] is vipassana. We can place this in
the first gear category.

In addition to all of the objects arising within experience, there is
often the sense that all of this is happening *to me*. All of this stuff
happening *out there* is being perceived by *me in here*. I’m looking
out at something, so *I* must be the one who is looking. In second gear,
we investigate this sense of subject, this sense of *I* to whom all of
this happening. Any practice that directly targets the apparent sense of
self falls into the category of second gear.

It could be argued that third gear, in its purest form, is not really a
practice at all; it is complete acknowledgement of and surrender to the
situation as it is. Such is the intention behind the “just sitting”
practice of Soto Zen as well as certain practices within the Tibetan
Buddhist traditions of Dzogchen and Mahamudra.

Understanding that the best practice is the one that is most beneficial
in this moment, we can leave behind a big bucket of unnecessary
suffering. When a practitioner laments the fact that she is not able to
sustain herself in third gear all the time, for example, a quick detour
to second gear would call into question this “self” who needs to have a
particular experience. And downshifting to first gear allows for the
invaluable feedback loop of noting (labeling) in order to stay on track
with minimal space-outs while also reducing experience to its bare
components, devoid of unnecessary rumination and worry.

The gearshift analogy points up the fact that it is possible to get more
traction with noting (1st gear) than with self-enquiry (2nd gear) or
surrender (3rd gear). Third gear practice is best done when there is
already a good deal of momentum. The automobile transmission idea
initially came from something I heard Shinzen Young say many years ago:
when things were tough, he would downshift to mindfulness of the body
(vipassana) as a kind of “first gear.” Once he got up a head of steam,
he might shift gears to another practice, perhaps Zen *shikantaza* (just
sitting). I found Shinzen's downshifting idea extremely helpful and
later developed it into a three-gear model, briefing flirting with a
5-speed transmission along the way.

The three speed transmission schema ties in with the idea of the yogi
toolbox. There are many powerful practices for training the mind.
Ideally, we collect a toolbox full of effective techniques over a
lifetime. And the most important tool in the box is a kind of
*meta-tool* that allows you to select the practice most appropriate to
any given moment. This, of course, is in direct opposition to the idea
that you should choose one technique and practice it for a lifetime. I
don't know anything about that, because I’ve always been eclectic and
experimental in my own practice. This dynamic approach has worked for
me, and this is how I teach.

Like all taxonomies, the three speed transmission is descriptive rather
than prescriptive; it is not intended to tell reality how to be, but
rather to give human beings a conceptual framework for understanding the
reality of meditation practice as it presents itself. As such, the model
is not perfect. You will be able to identify contemplative practices
that do not fit neatly into any of the three categories. In such a case,
the model has done its job; an exception to the model is made possible
by the conceptual framework provided by the model, thus continuing to
build out a scaffold upon which to hang further learning.

The progress of insight map
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

[*Editor's note: Introduce and define the Progress of Insight Map before
describing it in detail.*] The following is a description of how the
Progress of Insight stages might be experienced by an idealized
meditator.

If the Progress of Insight were plotted on a graph, it would start out
flat, rise until reaching a peak event, descend into a trough,
stabilize, and then resolve.

.. image:: progress-of-insight-plot.png

1. The opening act is the flat line at the left, understanding that the
   cycle moves from left to right. (As it is a cycle, this whole process
   might be more accurately represented as a circle, but I have
   deliberately chosen a linear graph for ease of understanding.) In
   traditional language, what I am calling the opening act includes the
   first two insight knowledges: Knowledge of Mind and Body and
   Knowledge of Cause and Effect.
   [http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/mahasi/progress.html]
2. The ascent. The third insight knowledge, Knowledge of the Three
   Characteristics.
3. The peak. The fourth and fifth insight knowledges, Knowledge of the
   Arising and Passing Away of Phenomena and Knowledge of Dissolution,
   respectively.
4. The descent. The 6th through 10th insight knowledges: Fear, Misery,
   Disgust, Desire for Deliverance, and Re-observation. These are
   collectively referred to as the dukkha ñanas or the dark night of the
   soul.
5. Consolidation and Resolution. Includes the 11th insight knowledge,
   Knowledge of Equanimity, the 12th through 16th insight knowledges,
   including Path and Fruition, all five of which are said to happen in
   one moment, and the 17th insight knowledge,
   Review.

Even though not everyone will recognize all of the stages or experience
them as described, the general arc holds true in most cases. It's
usually easier to recognize the stages on hindsight.

Knowledge of Mind and Body (Stage 1)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The opening stage feels solid. When our imaginary idealized meditator
first begins to sit down to meditate, her experience will probably be
fairly pleasant and unremarkable. Soon after starting, she will have her
first insight: seeing that the mind and the body are two separate
things, with each influencing the other. She sees a thought arise as
separate from “herself,” the knower of the thoughts. She may a notice a
sensation such as an itch and recognize that it is perceived in two
parts: the physical sensation itself, and the mental impression of it.

This is the beginning of a meta-awareness, a stepping back from
experience to be able to dispassionately observe experience, an ability
that will strengthen throughout the meditator’s life.

Our imaginary yogi has reached the first insight knowledge, the aptly
named Knowledge of Mind and Body. She is just beginning to settle into
meditation, which can be pleasant. There's often a deep sense of calm
and subtle exhilaration upon beginning a meditation practice. Our
meditator's experience at this point can be described as solid, because
she doesn't yet have the perceptual resolution and acuity to see things
changing at a fine level of detail. The ability to perceive at the level
of micro-sensations is the very heart of the vipassana technique and
that which gives it its unique transformative power.

A traditional example can help to illustrate what is meant by solid in
this context, and how objects that initially appear solid can be broken
down into their component parts through careful observation:

    Imagine that you are walking down a country road and you see what
    appears to be rope lying across the road, its ends disappearing into
    the brush on either side. As you draw closer, you notice that the
    rope is not lying still, as one would expect from a rope. It seems
    to be moving ever so slightly. Moving closer still, you realize that
    it is not a rope at all, but a line of ants crossing the road in
    both directions. Finally, you see that that line is composed of
    individual ants, each of which is composed of many constituent parts
    constantly in motion. The object of perception, which at first
    seemed to be a solid rope, is revealed to be a process rather than a
    thing.

This practice of deconstructing apparently solid objects of perception
into their constituent parts is fundamental to the practice of
*vipassana* [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vipassan%C4%81], which is
translated into English as “seeing clearly.”

The meditator at the level of the first insight knowledge, however, has
not yet done this. True vipassana doesn't begin until the fourth insight
knowledge, Knowledge of the Arising and Passing Away of Phenomena. It is
for this reason that the A & P, as I call it, is the most important of
the insight knowledges leading up to stream entry. Our imaginary yogi is
not there yet, however; next in the typical sequence of events is the
second insight knowledge, Knowledge of Cause and Effect.

Knowledge of Cause and Effect (Stage 2)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The second insight knowledge is the direct, visceral understanding of
what Buddhists call karma, as experienced in the meditator's own life.
She will feel in her gut the pain of her past unskillful actions and the
joy of past good deeds. She may notice how recalling painful experiences
or even imaginary arguments can lead to unpleasant sensations in the
body. Likewise with pleasant memories: when she remembers the time she
sent flowers to her mother for no reason, she will feel a deep happiness
in mind and body. Our meditator is likely to be slightly less
concentrated here than she was in the first stage, more prone to mind
wandering and reflection, less able to stay focused on the objects of
meditation, whether the sensations of breathing or the choiceless
noting/noticing of various phenomena as they spontaneously arise. Like
the first insight knowledge, this second stage is not necessarily a big
deal in the meditator’s life and may go unnoticed.

Knowledge of the Three Characteristics (Stage 3)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The name of this insight knowledge often leads to confusion. According
to early Buddhism, the three universal characteristics of existence,
also known as the three marks, are unsatisfactoriness (*dukkha*),
impermanence (*anicca*), and not-self (*anatta*). Therefore, given the
name of this, the third of the insight knowledges according to the
progress of insight map, we might expect to gain deep understanding of
all three characteristics at this stage. In practice, though, this stage
is just unpleasant. The body feels tight, tense, and anxious. This is
the stage of back pain, numb legs, distraction, discomfort, fidgeting,
and boredom.

Our meditator may become obsessed with her posture at this point,
looking for just the right way to sit in order to ease her discomfort.

A common landmark of the third insight knowledge is the experience of
bright, persistent itching. Many mediators report solid, unbearable
itches that seem to last for minutes and become more unpleasant with
attention. I call the sharp, pinpoint itch the “kiss of concentration.”
If you stay with one clear itch and become interested in it, it will
carry you into concentration and eventually into the fourth insight
knowledge, Knowledge of the Arising and Passing Away of Phenomena. If
such an itch arises, become interested in it. If you are doing freestyle
noting, it's okay to just note “itching” over and over again as you
focus on this one clear object. If you are using an anchor (primary
object) such as the breath, drop the breath entirely and place your
attention on the itch. Become the world's greatest authority on that
itch. What does it do? Does it get stronger, clearer, brighter? Does it
fade, pulse or strobe? After it fades out, stay in that area of a few
moments and see if it returns. Go back to random noting or your anchor
only after you are certain that you have wrung every bit of useful
information out of the itch (or the pulse or the throb or pain or
whatever is the predominant object).

Eventually everything will open up into champagne bubble-like
sensations, unitive experiences, rising energy waves, and a general
sense of well-being, signaling the arrival of the fourth stage, the A&P.
But you cannot skip over the unpleasantness of the third stage in order
to get to the fourth. Stay with the sensations as they are, whether
pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral, and let nature take its course.

The sticky places along the progress of insight are the third insight
knowledge and the tenth, respectively, the ascent to the crest of the
wave (3rd stage), and the descent into the trough that follows the crest
(10 stage). The insight knowledge is significant in that if it is not
overcome, the yogi will not progress to the all-important Arising and
Passing Away of Phenomena (4th stage), and will therefore not gain
access to the real fruit of contemplative practice. Having never
penetrated an object of attention, the pre-4th ñana yogi will remain
forever an outsider, looking in from behind the glass as others have
transformitive experiences that the pre-4th ñana yogi can only imagine.
Nonetheless, the 3rd ñana in itself does not present anything beyond
ordinary human suffering. The pain is mostly physical, mostly
experienced during formal meditation, and does not significantly affect
the yogi's life off the cushion. Such pre-4th ñana yogis, of which there
are many, often become religious, adopting the ideas and trappings of
whatever scene they are in. They may become devoted and much-valued
members of their spiritual/religious community. But they have not yet
understood the real value of this practice.

Knowledge of the Arising and Passing away of Phenomena (Stage 4)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The fourth insight knowledge could be said to be the most significant
event in a meditator’s career, and is often the most spectacular. This
is the spiritual opening, often a completely life-changing event. This
stage often involves unitive experiences, “God-union,” “the white
light,” mystical visions, and sublime ecstasy. It signals the beginning
of true spirituality, and while it is often mistaken for a culminating
event and heralded as an experience of “enlightenment”, it is really the
germination of the seed that will later come to fruition in stream entry
and further developments over a lifetime.

The A&P is not a spectacular event for everyone, however; it can be a
more subtle shift, with meditation becoming more pleasant and dynamic.
Even if our meditator does not experience a full-blown peak experience,
she will notice a change from the rough patch (3rd insight knowledge)
that preceded this stage. She is likely to feel a deep gurgling joy
bubbling up, rising through the body. The A&P is a very pleasant time in
meditation, bringing with it a kind of orgasmic joy that dwarfs the
pleasantness of the beginning stages.

It is common to experience brightness in the visual field during
meditation in this stage, as if someone just turned on the lights, even
with the eyes closed. Some people feel more energetic throughout the day
and have trouble sleeping. Dreams may be more vivid or intense. A kind
of manic joy may be experienced.

Bill Hamilton used to say that the A&P stage marks the first time the
meditator has managed to completely “penetrate the object.” To use the
metaphor from earlier, our meditator is now able to see the individual
ants that make up what she previously saw as a rope.

The meditator has managed to reduce a seemingly solid thing to its
component parts. A body sensation that was previously experienced as a
solid pain in her knee while sitting is now experienced as waves of
subtle twitching sensations. The clear, persistent itch from the third
insight knowledge breaks down into pulses and vibrations. Thoughts,
instead of sitting in the mind like stones, are seen to arise, live out
their brief existence, and then vanish cleanly into the nothingness
whence they came.

Sitting is effortless at this stage, and meditators tend to see their
daily hours of formal practice spike upward. It is not unusual for
someone in the throws of the A&P to sit for several hours a day. For a
few days around the attainment of the fourth insight knowledge, all is
right with the universe. The secular yogi feels enlightened, the
religious yogi feels touched by God, and both expect to live out the
rest of their lives at the crest of this infinite wave.

Waves, however, are not infinite, but temporal and cyclical in nature.
Returning to our graph, we see that the fourth insight knowledge exists
at the very peak of the cycle.

Because following the peak of every wave is a trough, there is trouble
on the horizon. Mercifully, the first part of the descent is pleasant,
though that may be viewed as a knife that cuts both ways as it does not
prepare the meditator for the horror of what is to come. Next in line is
the fifth insight knowledge, Knowledge of Dissolution.

Knowledge of Dissolution (Stage 5)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The fifth insight knowledge, Knowledge of Dissolution, is a very
chilled-out stage, especially compared to the overwhelming joy and
excitement of the previous stage. If the A&P is orgasmic joy,
dissolution is more akin to post-coital bliss.

Our meditator is in love with the world and everyone in it, but feels no
compulsion to do anything about it. Our meditator's experiences in
meditation are noticeably more relaxed than they were in the previous
stage, and she can easily sit for a long periods just grooving on the
cool, diffuse, tingling sensations of the body.

The characteristic mind state of the fifth insight knowledge is bliss
and the characteristic body sensations are coolness on the skin and
tingles. The mental focus is diffuse; it's possible to feel the skin all
over the body, all at once. This is something that is difficult to do in
any other stage, so when it happens, it's a good indicator that you are
moving through the dissolution stage. Bill Hamilton used to say of this
stage that you feel like a donut; you can be aware of the edges of an
object, but not the middle. During dissolution, if you try to notice
fine detail within the body, or experience a single sensation clearly,
or zoom in on a small area, you will become frustrated. Although zooming
in to a point would have been easy at an earlier level of development,
at this stage, everything is dissolving and disappearing, hence the name
“dissolution.” The observing mind is only able to perceive the passing
away of objects rather than their arising. If you are able to let this
happen naturally, it will be blissful, but if you fight it, it will be
frustrating. The mind is markedly unproductive at this stage.
Conversations are difficult and it's hard to concentrate. Attention is
diffuse, often dreamy, and there's a sense of being out of focus. By the
time a thought is recognized, it is already gone.

This happy stupidity does not last long, however, as the dukkha ñanas
are coming hard on its heels. We are about to enter the true low point
of the cycle, territory so daunting that it has tested the resolve of
many a yogi.

The Dukkha Ñanas
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[*Ñana (pronounced “nyana”) is a word from the Pali language of ancient
India, translated here as (insight knowledge).*]

The next five insight knowledges together form the most difficult part
of the Progress of Insight cycle. They are collectively called the
*dukkha ñanas*, the insight knowledges of suffering. I also refer to
them as the dark night of the soul, after the poem by 16th Century
Spanish Christian mystic Saint John of the Cross, which describes his
own spiritual crisis while practicing in a very different context. (The
fact that Saint John of the Cross, among others, has described this
mental territory in a way that is strikingly similar to Buddhist
descriptions is evidence for a developmental process the potential for
which is built-in to human beings, cutting across time spans,
traditions, and individuals.)

It makes sense to group the five difficult stages of the progress of
insight together as the dukkha ñanas because not every meditator is able
to distinguish the individual stages while going through them. Although
the Progress of Insight map describes a very particular sequence of
unpleasant experiences, many people just experience it as one big blob
of suffering while going through the cycle for the first time or even
after having gone through it many times. It is not necessary to
recognize each of the stages within the dukkha ñanas in order to make
progress. It is, however, important to understand that you are highly
likely to encounter difficult territory at some point. This is the value
of seeing the stages laid out as a graph; meditation does not simply
lead to a linear increase in happiness, and understanding this ahead of
time can save a great deal of confusion. Forewarned is forearmed, and
with a reasonable idea of what to expect as your own process unfolds,
you will be better prepared to deal with difficulty as it arises.

Knowledge of Fear (Stage 6)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The name says it all. Following the peak experience of the fourth ñana,
the Arising and Passing Away of Phenomena, our meditator's world began
to dissolve. But this was not a problem for her, as the deep joy of the
crest of the wave was smoothly replaced by cool bliss. Delicious
tingling sensations ran down the arms and legs and thoughts disappeared
before they could become the objects of obsession. Now, with the onset
of the 6th ñana, Knowledge of Fear, all of that changes. The dissolution
of thoughts and physical sensations continues, but the meditator now
interprets it very differently; she is terrified to see her world
falling apart.

About two weeks into my first three-month retreat at Insight Meditation
Society in Massachusetts in 1991, having already experienced the high of
the A&P (4th ñana) and the bliss of Knowledge of Dissolution (5th ñana),
I was passing the time before lunch by doing walking meditation on the
ancient, no-longer-used bowling alley of the former manor house when I
was overcome by a wave of abject terror. The hardwood floor of the
bowling alley no longer felt solid beneath my stockinged feet. The stark
colors of the floor and walls punished my eyes and the walls themselves
seemed to writhe and twist as I watched them. I pushed my hand against
the wall beside me, seeking something solid. The wall felt spongy. I
fell to my knees on the hardwood floor, oblivious to other yogis who may
have been passing by, and pushed my fingertips against the oak floor
boards, desperate to find something solid. My fingers seemed to sink
into the floor. Tears streamed down my face and tapped onto the wooden
floor as I found myself overcome by an unspeakable dread that I could
not understand.

This experience, which lasted about ten minutes, was my first full-blown
taste of the sixth insight knowledge, Knowledge of Fear. As intense as
it was, momentarily plunging me into what seemed like a bad acid trip
from a 1960s anti-drug propaganda film, it was mercifully brief and
passed cleanly away by early afternoon.

A traditional description of the sixth ñana describes a mother who has
just seen her husband and all but one of her sons executed. As her only
surviving son prepares to suffer the same fate, the dread that his
mother feels is akin to the dread of a yogi who attains to the sixth
ñana. Personally, I find this story a bit over the top, but it certainly
gets one's attention. And while Knowledge of Fear can indeed be intense,
as it was for me, for some yogis it is not spectacular at all, just
unpleasant.

Knowledge of Misery (Stage 7)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The next insight knowledge to arise, the aptly named Knowledge of
Misery, is number seven of the 16 insight knowledges (*ñanas*). The body
writhes, the skin feels like it is crawling with bugs, and the muscles
of the neck and jaw contract unpleasantly, pulling the face into a
rictus. It is hard to sit still on the meditation cushion, as the whole
body feels unsettled. Unpleasant sensations arise quickly and pass away
before the meditator can focus on them, thus taking away one of the
strategies that has served her well until now, that of focusing on
unpleasant body sensations in order to become concentrated. The
experiences I have listed are just some of the many possible ways in
which misery can arise. Each individual will have a unique experience.
The seventh ñana will not last long, perhaps not more than a day or two,
if that.

Knowledge of Disgust (Stage 8)
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The ancient ñana-naming commission once again scores a direct hit; the
eighth insight knowledge, Knowledge of Disgust is just as it sounds.
Food is repellant, the thought of sex is nauseating, and everyone smells
bad. The nose may wrinkle up as it if noticing and unpleasant odor.
Again, this ñana is generally short-lived.

Knowledge of Desire for Deliverance (Stage 9)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Do you know what it feels like when you are sobbing, completely at wit's
end, overcome by grief and self-pity? The body shakes and rocks, and you
feel the release of total surrender to your emotional pain. This is one
way the ninth insight knowledge (9th *ñana*), Knowledge of Desire for
Deliverance, can manifest. One way or the other, though, Desire for
deliverance is just what the name says: you want out. Out of this
situation, out of this experience, even out of this life. There is a
pervasive sadness, and a feeling of hopelessness. Most of all, there is
aversion. But it doesn't last long and next in line is…

Knowledge of Re-Observation (Stage 10)
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This is where the ancient Buddhist namers of *ñanas* fell down on the
job. The innocuous-sounding Knowledge of Re-Observation, tenth of the
sixteen insight knowledges, is a wolf in sheep's clothing. Books have
been written about it. It is the stuff legends are made of. A better
name might be Knowledge of Instability. This is the Dark Night of the
Soul, and the Agony in the Garden. Although some yogis are able to pass
through this stage relatively unscathed, it is common for a yogi's life
to be completely disrupted by the tenth ñana. It is the phase referred
to in Zen as the “rolling up of the mat,” because the yogi has the
intuitive sense that meditation is only adding to his misery, and
abandons the sitting practice. The 10th ñana is St. John of the Cross'
Dark Night of the Soul, a realm of such gut-wrenching despair that the
yogi may want to abandon all worldly (and otherworldly) pursuits, pull
down the shades, roll up into a ball and die. In more modern terms, the
10th ñana can be indistinguishable from clinical depression.

Although all of the ñanas (insight knowledges) numbered six through
eight are included in the dukkha ñanas, it is the 10th that causes the
real hardship, as the Re-Observation stage is an iterative rehash of the
Insight Knowledges of Fear, Misery, Disgust, and Desire for Deliverance,
along with some nasty surprises all its own.

When the yogi attains to the crest of the wave in the fourth ñana, she
believes that she has arrived at her destination. From here on in, she
reasons, life should be a breeze. Even if she has been warned, she does
not believe the warnings. She is completely unprepared for what is to
come and is blindsided by the fury of the tenth ñana, which consists of
the four previous ñanas of fear, misery, disgust, and desire for
deliverance repeating themselves in a seemingly endless loop, and worse
with each iteration. In addition, the strong concentration of the fourth
ñana (the A&P) seems to have disappeared; one cannot escape into a
pleasantly concentrated state, and there is no respite from the
unpleasantness and negativity that flood the body and mind.

Actually, the yogi's practice is even more concentrated than before, but
she is accessing unstable strata of mind that are not conducive to
restful mind states or happy thoughts. She obsesses about her progress,
is sure that she is back-sliding, and devises all manner of strategies
to “get back” what she has lost. The meditation teacher tries to
reassure the meditator that she is still on track, but to no avail. The
best approach at this point is to come clean with the yogi, lay the map
on the table, and say “You are here. I know it isn't easy, but it does
not last forever. If you continue to practice, you will see through
these unpleasant phenomena, just as you have seen through every
phenomenon that has presented itself so far. You are here because you
are a successful yogi, not because you are a failure. Let the momentum
of your practice carry you as you continue to sit and walk and apply the
vipassana technique.”

It is interesting to note that a yogi who is well-versed in jhana
(pleasant states made possible by high levels of concentration) may
navigate this territory more comfortably than a “dry vipassana” yogi, as
concentration is the juice that can lubricate the practice.

The pre-4th ñana yogi who repeatedly fails to penetrate the object and
proceed to the Arising and Passing Away of Phenomena is what Sayadaw U
Pandita calls the “chronic yogi.” This yogi can go to retreat after
retreat, over a period of years, and never understand what vipassana
practice is all about. He will, upon hitting the cushion, quickly enter
into a pleasant, hypnogogic state, maybe even discover jhana, but go
nowhere with regard to the insight knowledges. U Pandita's frequent
exhortations to greater effort and meticulous attention to detail in
noting the objects of awareness are aimed at this “chronic yogi.”

The “dark night yogi,” on the other hand, is Bill Hamilton's “chronic
achiever.” Having sailed through the all-important fourth ñana and
subsequent ñanas five through nine, he hits a wall at the tenth, and can
easily spend years there. But even the darkest night ends, and when it
does, dawn is sure to follow. The next stop on the Progress of Insight,
Knowledge of Equanimity, will make everything that came before it seem
worthwhile.

Knowledge of Equanimity (Stage 11)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The narrative of the ñanas continues with the 11th ñana, Knowledge of
Equanimity. The equanimity ñana is generally a very happy time for a
yogi. Having suffered through the solid physical pain of the third ñana
and having endured the dark night of the tenth ñana, the yogi wakes up
one day to find that everything is just fine. Dissolution of mind and
body continue, but it is no longer a problem. In fact, nothing is a
problem.

Compared with most of the other insight knowledge phases, the equanimity
ñana is particularly vast and complex, so it's useful to divide it three
sections. We’ll discuss it in terms of low, mid, and high equanimity,
each with its characteristic sign posts and challenges.

Low Equanimity
''''''''''''''

I mentioned earlier that the third and tenth ñanas are the only places
where a yogi gets hung up. I should perhaps include the early and middle
stages of the eleventh on that list. In early equanimity, a meditator
can get stalled-out here for lack of motivation. When everything feels
fine, there seems little reason to meditate. Many of us are motivated to
practice by our own suffering. And since there is very little suffering
in the equanimity phase, it is tempting to stop meditating and enjoy the
passing parade. The challenge, then, in early equanimity, is simply to
keep meditating, whether you feel like it or not.

A typical pattern that I have seen repeated in dozens of meditators is
this: shortly after attaining to the 11th ñana and feeling a great deal
of relief from suffering, especially as contrasted with the difficulties
of the dark night phase, the yogi becomes complacent and stops
practicing regularly. Someone who has maintained a regular practice of
an hour or more of formal sitting per days for months suddenly finds
himself sitting sporadically, perhaps two or three times a week, and
even then for less time than usual. The predictable consequence of this
reduction in practice is to fall back into the dukkha ñanas, at which
point the yogi, once again motivated by suffering, resumes a rigorous
practice schedule, returns to low equanimity, feels relief, stops
practicing again, and falls back into the dukkha ñanas. And so on. There
is no theoretical limit to how many times this can happen. Sooner or
later, the yogi figures it out; the key is to make a firm resolution to
keep practicing systematically until stream entry, *no matter what*.

Mid Equanimity
''''''''''''''

Back on a regular practice schedule, it doesn't take long for our model
meditator to pass from low equanimity to mid equanimity. At this stage,
the challenge is slippery mind. By slippery mind, I mean an inability to
stay focused on one object, and a tendency to drift into pleasant
reverie. At first, this isn't even noticeable to the meditator as she is
having so much fun feeling calm and free. After a while, though,
slippery mind becomes maddening; even if the meditator makes a firm
resolution to stay with her objects of meditation (in choiceless
vipassana, the objects of meditation are the changing phenomena of mind
and body as they spontaneously arise), another random thought train has
slipped in the back door almost before she has finished making the
resolution. Slippery mind is a natural consequence of a mind that is
unusually quick and nimble, together with the fact that the equanimity
ñana is still part of the dissolution process. In the first stage of
dissolution, the fifth ñana (Knowledge of Dissolution), the focus was on
the passing away of gross physical sensations, so it was experienced as
blissful. In the middle stages of dissolution, the *dukkha ñanas*
(numbers 6-10), the mind itself was seen to be dissolving, along with
the physical world and even one's own sense of identity. The fear and
grief induced by the loss of the apparent self were mind-shattering.
Now, in the eleventh ñana, Knowlege of Equanimity, the yogi has entered
the final stages of dissolution. Even the fear and grief are seen to
disappear as soon as they arise. Things are as they are, and life is
good. But the yogi will have to relearn the art of concentration.

One way to understand what is happening here is to hearken back to the
phases of :ref:`chicken herding <chicken-herding>`. In order to master the
equanimity ñana, the yogi has to completely develop the fifth and final
phase of chicken herding. In this phase, the chicken herder has become
one with the flock and is aware of the entire barnyard all at once. This
takes a great deal of momentum, and a great deal of practice, because
you can't “do” this as much as you can “allow” it; the latter phases of
concentration arise naturally when the momentum is strong. And in order
to have momentum, you must practice. Frustrated by her slippery mind,
however, the yogi may try to hold the objects of meditation too tightly.
This will not work with slippery mind. Holding tightly will not allow
the later phases of concentration to develop, and will result in yet
more frustration.

This is a good place to mention wandering mind and its relationship to
concentration. It is the nature of the mind to wander, and even advanced
meditators have to deal with this phenomenon. Wandering mind cannot be
defeated through brute force, but it can be managed. I once had a
beginning meditation student tell me that she had just finished a
sitting in which she thought about her kids, her husband, the shopping,
her job, and the fact that she was never going to be good at meditation.

“Excellent,” I told her. “Just meditate in between all of that.”

There is no point in trying to will your mind to silence by brute force,
because the effort to do so will make you even more agitated. Instead,
cultivate concentration (the ability to sustain attention on an object
with minimal distraction) a little bit at a time, in the same way that
you would build a muscle by exercising it. As the concentration muscle
gets stronger, you’ll be able to sustain it for ever longer periods of
time. Since the developmental process of awakening is dynamic, it's
unavoidable that you will have to relearn concentration skills at
various times along the way; every time your perceptual threshold
changes, you gain the ability to notice phenomena you couldn't see
before. This is a double-edged sword; life is richer and more
interesting, but there is also more potential for distraction. This
potential for distraction has to be balanced by corresponding increases
in your skill at concentration, which set the stage for yet another
change in perceptual threshold, and so on. Think of it as an ongoing
process rather than a discreet goal with a fixed end point, and be
prepared to keep pushing this edge of development throughout your life.

During any meditation sitting, there are moments when the monkey-mind
slows down enough that it's possible to stay with an object for a few
moments, whether the object is the breath, a kasina object, or whatever
it may be. Those few moments of concentration condition the mind in such
a way that there is a little less time before the next window of calm
appears in between the passing storms of monkey-mind. This momentum, or
snowball effect, where each little bit of calm conditions the next
moment of calm, is an important principle in Buddhist meditation. In
traditional teachings, the Buddhists identify “proximate causes” for
various mental factors. For example, the proximate cause for *metta*
(lovingkindness) is seeing goodness or “loveableness” in another person.
The proximate cause for *mudita* (sympathetic joy at the good fortune of
another) is seeing another's success. And the proximate cause for
concentration is none other than… concentration! With this in mind, it
is easy to see how important the snowball effect is when you are trying
to steady the mind. And from this point of view, there is no reason to
feel frustrated even when an entire sitting goes by with just a few
brief windows of calm. Every moment of concentration makes it more
likely that the next moment of concentration will arise. Always keep in
mind that it's all right that you haven't mastered this yet; you can
learn, you can get better. It's a process. Awakening itself is the
developmental process of learning to see experience as process. And
awakening, by this definition, is the crown jewel in the collection of
skills, understandings, and developments that, taken together, are
contemplative fitness.

Wandering mind, then, becomes ever more manageable with practice, and
this is good because the later phases of concentration (chicken herding
4 and 5) will not arise if the mind is not still. This does not mean
that thinking stops during deep concentration, but rather that it fades
into the background, slows down, and does not pull the mind away from
its intended target, i.e., the object or objects of meditation. When you
are firmly abiding in a jhana and thinking arises, it is felt as subtle
physical pain as it begins to pull you out of your pleasant state. With
practice, this pain becomes a familiar signal that it's time to turn the
mind away from thoughts and toward the object of meditation… or face the
consequences. The consequences are simply that you unceremoniously exit
the jhana. The skill to exit a jhana according to the schedule you
decided upon before entering the jhana as opposed to staying too long or
being dumped out prematurely is, as we discussed earlier, the fourth
parameter for mastery of a jhana.

So, how does the yogi get to equanimity in the first place? Why do some
people get hung up for years in the preceding ñana? The key to coming to
terms with the tenth ñana, Knowledge of Re-observation, is surrender.
Once the yogi surrenders to whatever her practice brings, she is free.
Having surrendered, it does not matter whether the present experience
goes or stays, or whether it is pleasant or unpleasant. It is this attitude
of surrender, along with time on the cushion, that results in the full
development of the strata of mind where fear, misery, and disgust live.
Once those mental strata are developed, or (viewed through another lens)
once the *kundalini energy* is able to move freely through those
chakras, it is as if a groove has been worn through that territory. You
now own that territory and although you move up and down through those
same mental strata every day and in each meditation session, they no
longer create problems in your meditation.

When it becomes obvious that slippery mind is the only thing standing
between you and further progress, there is a specific remedy that you
can apply. The trick is to target thoughts directly. Here are some
effective ways to do this:

1. Turn toward your thoughts as though addressing another person, and
   say, “Speak! I am listening.” Try it now. Notice how thought suddenly
   has nothing to say! The mind becomes silent as a church. Do this as
   many times as you need to until the mind becomes still.
2. Repeat to yourself silently or aloud, “I wonder what my next thought
   will be.” [This highly effective practice comes from Eckhart Tolle's
   *The Power of Now*.] Watch your mind the way a cat would watch a
   mousehole, alert to the exact moment the mouse (a thought) peeks its
   head out of the hole. By directly and continuously objectifying
   thought in this way, thoughts will subside, leaving blissful silence
   in the mind.
3. Note (label) your thoughts carefully. Put each thought into a
   category. Planning thought, scheming thought, doubting thought,
   self-congratulatory thought, imaging thought, evaluation thought,
   self-loathing thought, reflection thought. By objectifying your
   thoughts directly, you turn them into allies; the thoughts themselves
   become the object of your meditation rather than a problem.
4. Count your thoughts. By counting them, you have again made thoughts
   the object of your meditation. Thoughts are only a problem when they
   are flying under the radar. Light them up with attention and they
   cease to cause trouble.
5. Do a binary note (a noting practice that has just two choices) of
   “thinking/not thinking” or “noisy/quiet.”

Always think in terms of co-opting your enemies. Anything that seems to
be a hindrance in your practice should immediately be taken as the
object of your meditation. In this way, you turn the former hindrance
into an ally in your process of awakening.

High Equanimity
'''''''''''''''

Once thoughts have been clearly objectified and are no longer flying
under the radar, high equanimity naturally emerges. At this stage,
sitting is effortless. The yogi can sit happily for hours at a time. If
pain comes, no problem. Wandering mind, no problem. Objects present
themselves to the mind one after another, obediently posing for
inspection. This is where the yogi really gets a feel for what vipassana
is all about, as she effortlessly deconstructs each thought and
sensation that appears. In high equanimity, the mind is unwilling to
reach out to any object. It doesn't move toward pleasant objects or away
from unpleasant objects. This is what makes if possible to sit for long
periods of time; when pleasant is not favored over unpleasant, there is
no particular reason to get up.

The mind state of equanimity is inherently appealing. On a hierarchy of
desirable states, joy is higher than exhilaration, bliss is higher than
joy, and equanimity is higher than bliss. Viewed through this
understanding, it's easy to see the natural logic in how the Progress of
Insight unfolds; notwithstanding the occasional rough patches in the 3rd
ñana and the dukkha ñanas, the progression has moved from the quiet
exhilaration of the 1st ñana through the joy of the 4th, the bliss of
the 5th, and has finally stabilized in the equanimity of the 11th. From
my point of view as a teacher and coach, it's interesting to track the
hours of formal sitting as a yogi develops through the three phases of
equanimity. When she gets to high equanimity, the hours will usually
spike up. A meditator who has been struggling to find time in her busy
life for two hours of daily meditation may suddenly find herself sitting
three, four, or even five hours a day. Who knows where all these extra
hours come from? People will give up television, reading, time with
friends. They’ll sleep less and take less time eating than usual or
leave aside habitual tasks that don't really need to be done. When I ask
why they are sitting so much now, students reply that there isn't
anything else they’d rather do. They just feel like meditating. This
spike in practice hours is phase-specific and usually only lasts a few
days or weeks. It ends when the yogi reaches stream entry (or the *path*
moment of whichever cycle they happen to be working through at the
moment), at which time their practice hours fall back to a more
sustainable pace. Whenever I see a yogi's practice hours spike in this
way, I feel confident that they are about to complete a *path* and I
tell them so. This particular trick of prognostication has proven
remarkably accurate and I marvel every time this process unfolds as
predicted by a 2,000 year-old map of human development.

Path and Fruition
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Let's briefly review what we’ve seen so far:

Theravada Buddhism identifies Four Paths of enlightenment. The first of
these Four Paths can be subdivided into 16 “insight knowledges” or
*ñanas*. These ñanas arise one after the other, in invariable order, as
a result of vipassana meditation (objectifying, investigating, and
deconstructing the changing phenomena of mind and body). Most of the
heavy lifting is done in the first three ñanas; taken together, the
first three insight knowledges can be thought of as the pre-vipassana
phase. During this first phase of practice, it's as though the yogi is
rubbing two sticks together in an effort to start a fire.[*Thanks to
Shinzen Young for this image of rubbing two sticks together to start a
fire, thereby releasing the potential energy contained in the wooden
sticks.*] When the fire takes hold in earnest, the 4th ñana, the
all-important Arising and Passing of Phenomena (A&P) has been attained.
From this point on, the practice is more about constancy than heroics.
Patience and trust are important; at times it is necessary to avoid the
temptation to push too hard, understanding that just as you can't force
a young plant to grow by pulling on its stalk, you can't force yourself
to develop through the ñanas.

My hypothesis is that this process of development is hardwired into the
human organism. Everyone has the potential to develop along this
particular axis, and in order to do so one must simply follow the
instructions for accessing and deconstructing each new layer of mind as
it arises.

Stages 12-16
''''''''''''

We now continue to track the progress of our idealized yogi. It's
tempting to make a big deal out of the Path moment (the moment in which
stream entry is attained). So much emphasis is put on attaining stream
entry that we imagine there is some secret to it; surely there is some
special bit of knowledge or some extra bit of effort required to “get us
over this last hump.” In fact, it’s not like that at all. Just as all
the previous insight knowledges arose, in order, on cue, the Path moment
shows up out of nowhere when you least expect it. It's a little bit like
chewing and swallowing; when you put food into your mouth, you begin to
chew. At some point, when sufficient chewing has taken place, you
swallow. It's an involuntary reflex. You don't have to obsess about
whether swallowing will occur or try to control the process. If you do,
chances are you will just get in the way. Similarly, when you meditate
according to the instructions, the various strata of mind are
automatically accessed, the apparently solid phenomena are automatically
deconstructed, the information is naturally processed, and you
automatically move from one insight knowledge to the next without having
to orchestrate the process at all. In just this way, our yogi is sitting
there one day (or walking, or standing), and there is a momentary
discontinuity in her stream of consciousness. It's not a big deal. But,
immediately afterward, she asks herself, “Was that it?” It seems that
something has changed, but it's very subtle. She feels lighter than
before. Maybe she begins to laugh. “Was that it? Ha! I thought it was
going to be a big deal. That was hardly anything. And yet…”

Something is somehow different. It would be very difficult to say
exactly what. In many ways, things feel exactly the same.

In Mahasi Sayadaw's classic *The Progress of Insight*, he explains that
insight knowledges 12-16 happen all together, in a single instant.
Stages 12-15 are one-time events signaling stream entry, while stage 16,
fruition, can be re-experienced later as many times as desired. Mahasi’s
descriptions, based on the 5th Century Buddhist commentary the
*Vissudhimagga* (Path of Purification), itself based on an even earlier
text, the *Vimuddhimagga*, are interesting and well worth the
read.[http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/mahasi/progress.html#ch7.17]
From the point of view of the yogi, however, it's much simpler; she
develops through the first eleven insight knowledges and then something
changes in her practice, completing the Progress of Insight. From a
simple, subjective point of view, then, there are just twelve stages:
the first eleven, including equanimity, and the Path and Fruition event,
which somehow resets the clock and completes the cycle. Fruition is
technically the 16th insight knowledge, and we’ll preserve that
numbering system, although I will gloss over insight knowledges 12-15,
understanding them as theoretical structures intended to explain changes
the yogi will notice after the fact as opposed to discreet stages the
yogi experiences is real time as they occur. In fact, the yogi, by
definition, experiences nothing whatsoever during the momentary blip
that is the Path and Fruition moment.

Later, as the days and weeks go by, it becomes more and more clear that
the event was indeed First Path (stream entry). First of all, the
practice is different now. Instead of having to sit for 10 or 15 minutes
in order to work herself up to the 4th ñana, every sitting *begins* with
the 4th ñana or A&P. From there, it takes only a short time, sometimes a
few minutes, sometimes just seconds, to get to equanimity.

Second, our yogi may suddenly find that she has access to four or more
clearly delineated jhanas, or “realms of absorption.” She may find that
she can navigate these states simply by inclining her mind toward them,
jumping between them and manipulating them at the speed of thought.

Third, there is the possibility of re-experiencing the 16th ñana,
Knowledge of Frution; a yogi can learn to call up fruition, which, in
classical terms, is said to be the direct apprehension of nibbana
(nirvana), at will. There are said to be three doors to nibbana, namely
the dukkha (suffering), anicca (impermanence), and anatta (no-self)
doors. Each of these modes of accessing cessation leads to a slightly
different experience of entering and exiting nibbana. The fascinating
exploration known as fruition practice is only available to post-stream
entry yogis and consists of systematically calling up, becoming familiar
with, and comparing these phenomena.

And finally, there is the 17th ñana, “knowledge of review.” It is
possible to learn to call up each of the ñanas 1-11 in addition to the
16th ñana of fruition and re-experience them as a kind of laboratory for
understanding what the insight knowledges feel like and what insights
they bring. (Ñanas 12-15 are one-time events marking the attainment of
Path and as such cannot be reviewed.) The ability to review previously
attained ñanas is especially helpful for those who plan to become
meditation teachers, but is interesting and useful for everyone because
the ñanas will continue to cycle throughout a yogi's lifetime and it's
very empowering to be able to identify them as they arise. This ability
to see sensations, thoughts, and mind states as process rather than
identifying with them is part of the larger process of awakening. When
we objectify (take as the object of attention) something that was
previously seen as self, we move to more and more subtle forms of
identification and ultimately come to the place where everything in
experience can be seen as process, impersonal and ever-changing.

Knowledge of Review
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Question:

    Kenneth, I’m curious about the phenomenon called “cycling” and how
    that manifests. I relate well to the part of your commentary that
    explains the initial run-up to stream entry. I relate well to your
    explanation of a yogi's practice and how it changes after achieving
    stream entry. In MCTB
    [https://www.amazon.com/Mastering-Core-Teachings-Buddha-Unusually/dp/1904658407]
    Daniel Ingram makes reference to the part concentration plays
    in recognizing progress and he explains that a person with less
    concentration (attention?) will be less clued in to where they are
    and what's going on. Your description below hints at the same kind
    of thing: “Third, there is the **possibility** of re-experiencing
    the 16th ñana, frution; a yogi can **learn** to call up fruition,
    which is said to be the direct apprehension of nibbana (nirvana) at
    will. There are three doors to nibbana, namely the dukkha
    (suffering), anicca (impermanence), and anatta (no-self) doors. Each
    of these modes of accessing cessation leads to a slightly different
    experience of entering and exiting nibbana. The fascinating
    exploration known as fruition practice is only available to
    post-stream entry yogis and consists of systematically calling up,
    becoming familiar with, and comparing these phenomena.” (I added the
    emphasis to highlight the parts of your comments I was referring to
    in the above.)

    Can you elaborate on the role concentration plays at this stage? I
    have not been paying very close attention to where I am according to
    the four path model (or any model) and I think I’m missing some
    important information due to my self-induced ignorance. I experience
    fruition, but it occurs infrequently and on the cushion. Is it
    possible to miss the experience of fruition if it happens during a
    meeting, walking along, driving, what have you? Will increasing my
    concentration help me recognize it?

Answer: A high level of concentration is required in order to complete
the 16 ñanas and attain stream entry, but I wouldn't say that
concentration is the deciding factor in whether a yogi recognizes and
can effectively review the territory; it would seem that attitude and
training are more important. Here is an example that might help to make
the point:

A Zen student attains stream entry. This happens in spite of the fact
that neither ñanas nor Paths are mentioned in Zen training and is not
surprising given that the ñana/Path model is just one way to describe
and map a natural, organic process of human development. Having
traversed the territory, though, the Zen student has no meta-perspective
that will allow him to conceive of what he has been through. In fact,
throughout the Zen training, the various phenomena that arise during
meditation are actively invalidated by the teacher; all of the pleasant
and unpleasant experiences are considered “makyo” (hallucination). A
good Zen student learns very quickly not to attempt to make sense of
meditative phenomena for fear of incurring the ire of the teacher. In
this case, both attitude (the belief that thinking about or assigning
importance to meditative experiences is dangerous) and a lack of
training in identifying and systematically accessing various states
conspire to prevent the Zen yogi from mastering this aspect of practice
even though he has shown that he has sufficient concentration to access
them.

In cases like this, a bit of remediation is in order for those who would
like to understand and master the mental territory that has become
available with the advent of stream entry. This is similar to the
situation you now find yourself in, so I’ll bring this back to specifics
and offer a prescription that is tailored to you.

You have already taken several important steps toward understanding your
experience; you have begun to educate yourself about the phenomena by
reading about the maps, you have identified fruition as a recurring
phenomenon in your own experience, and you have made a commitment to
learn more. The next step is to notice patterns in how your experience
manifests both during a sitting and over a period of hours and days.
Notice, for example, that a sitting will often follow a predictable
pattern; beginning with very little concentration, you become more and
more concentrated until you reach a climax of concentration, sometimes
culminating in a fruition or series of fruitions, after which you become
less concentrated again and have to work your way up to a concentrated
state again.

Using more technical language, a stream-enterer's sitting begins with
the 4th ñana, progresses through ñanas 5-11, then leaps to the 16th
ñana, fruition, often a momentary event and experienced as a blip-out or
discontinuity of conscious awareness. After that, it resets to the 4th
ñana and repeats the pattern. You can enhance your ability to notice the
various states as they arise by keeping a journal of each sitting. Over
time you see a pattern. For example, here's a typical sequence of events
that might unfold during a single sitting for a meditator in the review
phase after stream entry:

-  I started the sitting with my mind a jumble (the mind is not yet
   settled enough to access any Insight Knowledge).
-  Almost immediately, my mind settled down and I felt pleasant tingling
   and vibrating in my leg, along with a feeling of well-being and
   lightness (4th ñana, Arising and Passing of Phenomena).
-  Next, there were subtle, cool tingles all over my skin and I felt
   bliss (5th ñana, Dissolution).
-  Next, I heard a sudden noise and was startled, frightened, and
   disoriented (6th ñana, Fear).
-  Next, my jaw and neck started to tighten and writhe, and I felt
   itches on my skin (7th ñana, Misery).
-  Next, I began thinking about snails and worms and ugly people, and my
   face pulled involuntarily into a sneer (8th ñana, Disgust).
-  Next, my chest became tight, my breathing shallow, and I started
   thinking “Let me out of here!” (9th ñana, Desire for Deliverance).
-  Next, my mind was full of all kinds of negativity, my concentration
   went to hell, and I began thinking I was wasting my time and I might
   as well get up and have another cup of coffee or watch some
   television. I started thinking about the argument I once had with
   someone, and how I had definitely been in the right (10th ñana,
   Knowledge of Re-observation).
-  Finally, my mind settled down once again, the field of attention
   expanded to include the entire environment around me, and sitting was
   effortless. There was a pain in my leg, but it was no problem; I
   experienced it as a flow of sensations, some pleasant, some
   unpleasant, but none of it was a problem (11th ñana, Knowledge of
   Equanimity).
-  I became even calmer. Then, when I wasn't expecting anything, there
   was a momentary discontinuity in my awareness, followed by a deep
   breath and a feeling of bliss (16th ñana, Knowledge of Fruition).
-  After that, I sat up straight, feeling energy returning to my body
   and mind and realized I was back at the beginning of the cycle (4th
   ñana, Knowledge of The Arising and Passing Away of Phenomena).

Sometimes these stages go by very quickly. You may get just a momentary
taste of each ñana as you quickly move through it to the next.
Nonetheless, with repeated observations, you can see that the mind is
moving through a series of layers or strata as it becomes more
concentrated throughout the sitting. Also remember that “concentrated”
does not mean “focused on one small area or object.” Rather, it means
“remaining undistracted with the mind resting in the object or objects
of meditation.” In fact, as concentration deepens throughout the
sitting, the movement is toward an ever-more-diffuse field of awareness.

Once you have a feeling for what each state or stage entails, you can
make a resolution (Pali: *adhitthana*) to call up each state and review
it in isolation. You can call up any state in any order in this way.
This becomes your laboratory for really understanding and identifying
each of the ñanas. The formal resolution does not have to be elaborate;
it can be as simple as “May I review the 4th ñana now,” or “OK, I wanna
do some fruitions.” The more you work with resolutions, the more
confidence you have in them, until it becomes clear to you that all
these states are available to you instantaneously by simply deciding to
go there. Finally, the answer to the question “how do you get to
such-and-such a ñana or such-and-such a jhana”? becomes as simple as the
question “how do you get to the kitchen from the living room”? You just
go there. You don't even think about it. That level of proficiency with
jhanas and ñanas is a realistic goal for anyone who has the interest and
the willingness to train systematically toward it. Taken together, this
kind of training is called *adhitthana* practice, and is usually
undertaken during the 17th ñana (Knowledge of Review), review phase but
can be done any time after First (or any other) Path.

The first time through the complete cycle usually takes months,
sometimes years, and, by definition, results in the first path of
enlightenment, using traditional Theravada Buddhist language. The first
path attainment is also referred to as stream entry, which is what we
will call it in this book. Having made it all the way through the cycle
once, you now “own” it, and can learn to review all of the territory you
have covered. Even without further practice, you will naturally cycle
through this territory. At some point, though, the mind seems to get
tired of this first package and moves on. You find yourself at the
beginning of a new progress of insight, another run through the cycle
you had completed to attain stream entry.

The cycles continue to occur whether or not the meditator pays attention
to them. They become a natural part of life, like the breath, or the
sleep cycle, or the seasons and the year. Just as one doesn't get tired
of breathing or sleeping, but surrenders to the natural rhythms of life,
someone who has continued to practice beyond stream entry has integrated
the cycles into his or her daily rhythms. And although we may get tired
of the seasons, as we do when it is very hot in the summer or very cold
in the winter, we are deeply confident that they will soon change.

The map is not the territory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    “The map is not the territory.” -Alfred Korzybski

It would be tempting the imagine that one could walk through the insight
stages exactly as they are described on the Progress of Insight map,
with each phenomenon showing up exactly on cue. It is reassuring to see
yourself as the perfect example of meditative development. As with any
map of human development, however, there are infinite individual
variations. It is one thing to accept that there is an overall sweep of
progress that moves through predictable stages, each building upon the
other, and it is another thing entirely to expect to see each
developmental landmark the same way someone else saw it.

We must also remember that the Theravada Progress of Insight map and the
Theravada practice approach and techniques reinforce one another; if you
are practicing vipassana, you are training yourself to meticulously
observe your own moment by moment experience. In traditions that
emphasize the Progress of Insight map, you may also be trained to
observe patterns over time. In such a program, you are likely to see
things in a developmental sequence and you are likely to have the
perceptual and conceptual tools to map your own experience and to be
able to compare it to a standard map of development. In other systems,
this may not be the case. In some Zen systems, for example, meditators
are taught to see all temporal phenomena as illusion.
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Makyo] They may be encouraged to ignore
any thoughts they may have about the order in which experiences unfold.
This would be a profoundly anti-mapping approach. The emphasis in such a
case is on the momentary experience, to the exclusion of all else. A
meditator might become very advanced in such a system and yet have no
ability to track his or her progress through time.

Although maps are not necessary to progress, they are extremely useful
for many people. This speaks to the fundamental assumption of pragmatic
dharma: do what works. Maps work. We understand from modern methods of
education that if you can clearly articulate a goal, subdivide that goal
into smaller, attainable sub-goals, and provide clear feedback all along
the way, the student has a high probability of success. Using the
Progress of Insight map is consistent with what we now know about how
people learn. Zen, on the other hand, is not. It should be no surprise,
then that it is a truism in Zen that only one student in a hundred
succeeds. This is a romantic notion that may appeal to a certain macho
sense of specialness, but it is terrible pedagogy. So, we use the maps,
understanding their limitations, because to date we have nothing else
that approaches the success rate of pragmatic dharma.

Here's what every student can reasonably expect:

In the beginning stages of a meditation practice, it is often possible
to calm the mind after a few minutes of noting or following the breath.
At this stage, students expect that the more they meditate, the calmer
they will become, and that this will continue forever. But it doesn't
happen that way. Instead, after an initial period of success, meditation
gets harder; meditators encounter rough patches and become discouraged.
This happens to almost everyone, although details vary. For some, the
distraction is caused by itching; for others, back pain; for still
others, it is wandering mind. But the pattern of starting out optimistic
and later getting discouraged almost always holds.

For those who continue with good technique and good coaching, there is a
noticeable shift from this first difficult stage, in which meditation
becomes effortless again. For some people, this will be a spectacular
event, with lights, unitive experiences, and life-changing shifts in
perspective… for others, it will be much less dramatic; they’ll simply
that they are enjoying their meditation again. This is a good example of
how the overall map holds while individual expression of the
developmental phases varies. After some days or weeks in this new, easy
and pleasant phase, meditation gets hard yet again. Then it gets easy
again. And so on. Experienced teachers look for these changes, and are
ready to give encouragement or suggest tweaks in technique or attitude
to counter predictable challenges. One criticism of maps in general is
that students will learn the maps and imagine themselves into the
various states in order to convince themselves or the teacher that they
are making progress. This is a legitimate concern, but it isn't a big
deal. In the first place, it is hard to fool an experienced teacher. For
another thing, who cares if the student is mistaken about his progress?
These things tend to work themselves out over time. When life kicks your
ass again, it's back to the cushion.

A metaphor is useful here; we see that a human being follows a typical
developmental arc, from infant to toddler, to pre-adolescent,
adolescent, young adult, mature adult, to old age, and finally death.
This general sequence is a reliable predictor of the arc of a human
life, albeit with infinite variations in the way an individual will
experience these changes. With this in mind, it need not be so
surprising that we develop through meditative insight in a more or less
predictable sequence; humans have a lot in common with each other, and
often develop along predictable lines.

Finally, understand that you will spend a lifetime learning at ever
deeper levels that the map is not the territory. A map is a concept, an
embarrassingly incomplete summary made possible by the extraordinary
human powers of pattern recognition. The map will help you orient
yourself, normalize your experience, and find motivation to practice.
But your experience will be uniquely your own, rich and complex beyond
imagining, and ultimately impervious to even the most sophisticated
efforts at cartography. One of the last things Bill Hamilton said to me
while on his death bed in a Seattle hospital in 1999 was, “All maps
eventually fail.”

Use the maps wisely, accept that they will fail, and understand that
your own experience supersedes any concept. The map is not the
territory.

    “When the bird and the book disagree, always believe the bird.” -
    John James Audubon

Concentration, Mindfulness, and Investigation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*Concentration*, as we are using the word here, is the ability to
sustain the mind on an object with minimal distraction. Concentration is
the opposite of mind-wandering. The focus of the mind during
concentration can be narrow and laser-like, zooming in, for example, on
a single point of body sensation, or it can be wide and diffuse, where
the entire environment is the object of attention. So it is important to
understand that *non-distractedness* is the key to concentration. In
Buddhist theory, concentration (*samadhi*) is one of the seven factors
of enlightenment, the seven mental factors that are said to come into
balance during a moment of awakening. Concentration, then, is essential
to contemplative fitness, both for the attainment of altered states and
for the ability to see experience as process, aka awakening or
enlightenment.

To get a picture of what concentration looks like, think of a cat
sitting on the front lawn, watching a gopher hole. The cat is completely
focused on the task; it may sit alertly for ten or twenty minutes,
patiently staring at the hole in the ground, waiting for the gopher to
pop its head out. This is concentration. From this image, we can also
see why concentration alone is not enough to gain enlightenment; cats
are not enlightened, notwithstanding their prodigious concentration
skills. So concentration is but one of the skills required. This point
comes further into focus if we compare and contrast concentration and
mindfulness (*sati*). I like to define *mindfulness* as noticing that
you are noticing. While a cat has wonderful concentration, it is hard to
imagine that there is much self-awareness there. The cat does not notice
that it is noticing, and hence will never become enlightened; among the
inhabitants of this planet, the ability to balance mindfulness and
concentration is probably unique to humans.

It is a truism in Buddist theory that concentration alone will never
lead to awakening. In the Mahasi tradition, monks can wax positively
derisive about people who sit around for hours in highly concentrated
states but never investigate the objects of attention. These theoretical
concentration junkies are objects of mild pity. So, we must be careful
not to fall into the concentration trap. But let's not let this pendulum
swing too far!

Concentration is, after all, one of the seven factors of enlightenment,
and without it a meditator cannot stay with any one object long enough
to investigate and deconstruct the object. Furthermore, “dry” vipassana
practice (investigation without concentration) can be painful at times.
Concentration is the juice that lubricates your practice, keeps you
interested, brings pleasant experiences, and therefore motivation to
practice. For all these reasons, it is well worthwhile to become adept
at concentration. The section on pure concentration will introduce
targeted practices to develop concentration in isolation, understanding
that eventually your facility with concentration will be integrated into
all the other practices you do, forming a whole that is greater than the
sum of the parts. For now, though, let's continue to contrast
concentration with other important mental factors.

Imagine that I hand you a package. It's a box, all wrapped in colored
paper and bows. A pure concentration approach would be to put your hand
on the package and leave it there, maintaining just enough contact with
the tactile sensation or visual appearance of the package to focus your
mind on it to the exclusion of everything else. Whenever your attention
wanders away from the package, bring it back. You want to become so
focused on the package that you merge with it. You don't know what's in
the package; you don’t care. A vipassana approach, on the other hand,
would be to take the package from my hand, shake it, prod, poke and
palpate it, give it a thorough visual examination from all angles and
distances, and finally to begin tearing off the paper and the box, layer
by layer, to discover what is inside. Vipassana requires that you
balance concentration with mindfulness and investigation. Remember that
mindfulness is noticing that you are noticing. Investigation is just as
it sounds; what is this thing? I must investigate to find out.

Vipassana leads to the deconstruction of initially solid-seeming objects
into their component parts. With pure concentration, the object becomes
more solid as you apply the technique, whereas with vipassana, the
object becomes less solid, and more fluid. When awakening is the goal,
the ideal is a dynamic balance of concentration, mindfulness, and
investigation. This balance allows you to maintain focus on the objects
of attention with minimal distraction while also deconstructing the
object.

