<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />

    <title>Introduction</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/epub.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="introduction">
<h1>Introduction</h1>
<p>There is a kind of human development that has gone largely unnoticed in
the West. Even as mindfulness meditation makes its way into hospitals,
schools, and outpatient treatment facilities, our culture doesn’t yet
have an over-arching concept of how meditation is relevant to our lives.</p>
<p>Meditation is much more than stress reduction. Meditation changes your
brain. Do it enough and it will change your life.</p>
<p>In this book, I hope to present a conceptual framework in which to place
meditation and related contemplative practices, and to show how this
particular branch of human development is as essential to a human life
well-lived as psychological health, emotional maturity, or physical
fitness. In fact, the various kinds of mental and physical fitness work
together such that the whole is greater than the sum of the parts; one
step forward on any of the lines of human development makes it easier to
access any of the others.</p>
<p>Just as we can speak of physical fitness and mental fitness, we can
identify a branch of human development that we might call <em>contemplative
fitness</em>. Contemplative fitness has to do with the kind of growth that
comes from meditation and related contemplative practices. Its ultimate
manifestation is a kind of persistent well-being that is independent of
external circumstances. At its essence, contemplative fitness is the art
of being OK. And from the platform of being OK, the stage is set for the
very best of humanity to emerge. When you are OK, an enormous amount of
energy is freed up to find out what it means to be truly human. When you
don’t have to work so hard to protect yourself, you have, perhaps for
the first time, the luxury of considering the needs of others. It is
from this stable place of equanimity and self-acceptance that we can
learn to access levels of sensitivity, creativity, spontaneity, and
empathy that we didn’t know existed. One aspect of contemplative fitness
has to do with what has often been called spiritual awakening or
enlightenment. This phenomenon is real, and it happens to real people in
our own time; it happened to me, and the first part of this book
describes that process. But rather than thinking of this awakening as a
panacea, a magical wand to wave away our difficulties, we can take a
more nuanced view, a more realistic and balanced understanding that
takes into account what we now know about psychology, physics, and
neurobiology. In order to embrace the benefits of contemplative fitness,
we don’t have to believe that at some point, if we meditate enough, we
will behave impeccably, glow in the dark, or suddenly have access to the
90% of our brain that we imagine is now lying dormant.</p>
<p>Contemplative fitness, as I teach it, does not require the adoption of
any philosophical or religious beliefs. I will not make claims about the
structure of the universe or the ultimate nature of reality. I don’t
teach how to be right, smart, perfect, sanitized, or holy. I don’t teach
super-powers or extra-sensory perception. I don’t teach religion,
guru-worship, dogma, or doctrine. I don’t teach people to uncritically
accept what I say. I simply teach practical, hands-on techniques that,
when practiced diligently, can be utterly transformative to a human
life. To the extent that I offer concepts and ideas, they are intended
not as doctrine, but as conceptual frameworks within which to understand
your own experience. The second part of this book, Theory, will help you
orient yourself as you practice.</p>
<p>Contemplative fitness is spiritual enlightenment for the 21st century.
And although no less valuable than the mythologized notions of the past,
the modern version does not require us to suspend common sense. Rather,
it requires us to do some work; progress comes as a result of effective
training. The third part of the book, Method, will give you the tools to
find this out for yourself.</p>
<section id="the-physical-fitness-revolution">
<h2>The physical fitness revolution</h2>
<p>When I was a boy growing up in Southern California in the 1960s, the
concept of physical fitness, as we know it today, did not yet exist.
There had always been sports and athletics, of course, but those
pursuits were for a special minority; most of us were not athletes and
did not consider exercise to be particularly relevant to our lives
except in our capacity as spectators.</p>
<p>And yet, change was in the air. A few visionaries had taken it upon
themselves to bring exercise to the people. And it was from these early
efforts that the modern concept of physical fitness emerged and began to
penetrate the consciousness of everyday folks. One early pioneer was
Jack Lalanne, who would eventually come to be seen as the “godfather of
fitness.” I remember Jack Lalanne well. He had his own television show,
was impressively muscular, charmingly energetic, and always dressed in
his trademark black or navy blue jumpsuit. And he always seemed to be
doing jumping jacks. The popular image of physical fitness in the 60s
was Jack Lalanne doing jumping jacks. At a time when there were only a
handful of television stations to choose from, Jack Lalanne was
impossible to miss, and he soon became a fixture in every living room in
America. Before long, we were all doing jumping jacks in front of the
TV.</p>
<p>We can look back now and chuckle at how unsophisticated we were compared
to our current understanding of physical fitness. There has been an
explosion of sophistication in both the theory and application of
exercise science. It is now possible to train with great precision to
achieve virtually any kind of physique, always taking into account your
own natural strengths and limitations. Whether you want to be a ballet
dancer or a power lifter, a tennis player or a marathoner, you can find
a fitness trainer who can help you do it. Most importantly, everyday
folks who have no intention of ever playing a competitive sport
understand the value of physical fitness and often make it a priority in
their lives. Physical fitness is real, the concept is well established,
and the benefits are well accepted, not just for athletes, but for
everyone. And all of this has happened within a single human lifetime.</p>
<p>We are ready for a parallel revolution in contemplative fitness. Years
from now, we will look back and chuckle at how unsophisticated we were
in our understanding of meditation and its benefits way back in the
opening years of the 21st century. Even for those of us who accept that
such a thing as spiritual awakening is possible, the field tends to be
shrouded in religion, superstition, hero-worship, and unrealistic
expectations. We look for inspiration to the Buddha, the Zen Patriarchs,
Ramana Maharshi, or some saintly figure from our own time, rarely
allowing ourselves to consider that in order for awakening to become
real, we must make the transition from spectators to participants. The
physical fitness revolution exploded when we stopped watching Jack
Lalanne on TV and started doing jumping jacks of our own. The
contemplative fitness revolution will begin when we stop looking to our
spiritual heroes and start meditating. In this book, I will tell my own
story first. It is the story of a depressed and addicted young man who
found his way in the world through a single-minded obsession with
meditation. Next, I will present a theory of contemplative development
based on my formal Buddhist training as well as my thirty-plus years of
dedicated practice and my twenty-plus years of teaching meditation and
awakening. Finally, I will offer a detailed method that has been
successful for dozens of ordinary people as I have guided them through
their own process of discovery. My hope is that twenty years from now,
contemplative fitness will be as much a part of mainstream culture as
physical fitness is today. I believe that a great deal of good will come
from such a revolution.</p>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>