<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />

    <title>1. Book One: Kenneth’s Story</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/epub.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="book-one-kenneth-s-story">
<h1><span class="section-number">1. </span>Book One: Kenneth’s Story</h1>
<section id="the-setup">
<h2><span class="section-number">1.1. </span>The Setup</h2>
<p>In 1982, I was a suicidally depressed cocaine addict. A 23-year old
musician in Los Angeles, I had a lot of free time to sit around being
depressed and wondering how my life had gone so terribly wrong. I was
trying to kick my cocaine habit, and failing. One night, alone at home,
having exhausted all the cocaine in the house and spiraling into
despair, I took four hits of LSD. And while I’m neither advocating drugs
nor taking a moral stance against them, this is what happened.</p>
<p>I put the LSD in my mouth and turned on the television. I watched part
of the <em>Shogun</em> miniseries about a 17th Century English ship pilot who
was shipwrecked in Japan and adopted Samurai culture. There is a scene
in which John Blackthorne, the protagonist, who has now become a
Samurai, decides to commit <em>seppuku</em>, Japanese ritual suicide by
disembowelment. Just as Blackthorne is tensing his muscles to plunge his
short sword into his own abdomen, another Samurai reaches out and grabs
Blackthorne’s hand, preventing his suicide. Watching this scene on
television, I wondered about the changes that might take place in the
mind of someone who had completely accepted death in a moment and yet
didn’t die. I was fascinated by the question, and this theme of death
and rebirth would set the tone for the evening.</p>
<p>I went into my bedroom, closed the door, and lay down on the bed, face
up. I had nothing left to do but reflect upon the unsatisfactoriness of
my own life. Still pondering the question of death, I remembered another
movie I had seen in which an old Native American Indian chief climbs a
hill and lies down on a funeral pyre. The pyre is not lit; it’s just a
bunch of sticks. The old man lies down on the pyre and says to himself.
“Today… is a good day to die.”</p>
<p>Tired, defeated, and yet inspired by the possibility of surcease, I said
to myself, “Yes. Today <em>is</em> a good day to die.” In that moment, my mind
felt so powerful, so focused… I was absolutely convinced that I could
will myself to death.</p>
<p>Flat on my back, I began to meditate, using a technique I had learned
from my older brother a couple of years before. It was a simple
concentration exercise, nothing more than looking at the backs of my
eyelids with eyes closed, and falling into the blackness there. In the
past, I had practiced it occasionally in an effort to relax, and to have
an interesting experience of an altered state of consciousness. Now, I
was meditating with a purpose. And as I was thus engaged, earnestly
attempting to will myself to death, an odd thing happened; it occurred
to me that if I <em>did</em> die, I would be opening myself up to whatever
negative forces were out there in the ether. I had a visceral fear that
there was some kind of malevolent force, some kind of evil that would
wash over me and take control if I let down my guard. I think I also
understood in that moment that I had never let down my guard before. So
here I was, 23 years old, and somehow I had managed throughout my entire
life to maintain a wall, to keep something, who knows what, from
entering my consciousness and taking it over. I could feel this
unspeakable evil clamoring outside the gates, trying to get in. I was
both terrified and bemused.</p>
<p>I wondered if this was what Christians meant by “the Devil,” the very
personification of evil. Interestingly, I wasn’t the least bit
religious. I thought religion was foolish. I didn’t believe in God. I
didn’t believe in the Devil. But somehow here I was, thinking “the
Devil’s gonna get me.” Ridiculous, on hindsight, like something out of a
seventies-era comedy skit. At the time, though, it didn’t feel like a
joke. Far from it, in fact; I had never been so frightened. This fear
lasted for a few moments, and then I began to ponder a kind of equation
of good and evil: if indeed there were such a thing as the Devil, then
there must also be such a thing as a God, in which case, if I opened
myself up entirely, they would either cancel themselves out or God would
win. Somehow, this childlike idea of symmetry in the universe gave me
just the courage I needed to take the leap. So I did. I opened up
entirely and surrendered to death.</p>
<p>This absolute and unquestioned surrender to my own death… no, even more,
<em>commitment</em> to it… inspired by the movie scene I’d seen earlier of John
Blackthorne’s abortive suicide attempt, triggered a remarkable series of
events.</p>
<p>Immediately upon acceptance of my own death came the recognition that
the “malevolent forces” barely held at bay for so many years by my own
dogged unwillingness to admit them, were none other than my own fears. I
was protecting myself from <em>myself</em>. This recognition, so surprising and
stark, brought, all of itself, enormous relief. The insufferable burden
of a lifetime was seen as an illusion fueled by a misconception. Indeed,
the fears themselves were tolerable; it was the effort to avoid them
that I could not endure. With the shattering of the illusion, a burden
was lifted and the need to die was gone, but the event now had a
momentum of its own and continued to unfold even though all thoughts of
self-destruction had evaporated.</p>
<p>Next was a kind of instantaneous life review. A thousand images flowed
through my mind in a single moment, images of things I had done, both
“good” and “bad.” The theme was that actions have consequences; it was
immediately and intuitively obvious that actions motivated by good will
had led to positive results while actions motivated by ill will had led
to sorrow. This insight was matter-of-fact, with no implied judgment or
moralism; here is everything I’ve done, and here are the consequences of
each action. Here was my very own mechanistic, non-moralistic judgment
day.</p>
<p>The experience continued to unfold in stages. Next, I found myself being
drawn up into the sky through what appeared to be a long glass tube. I
was fascinated, riveted by this experience. Suddenly, there appeared a
flock of small, translucent, quasi-intelligent, possibly unfriendly
beings on the other side of the glass tube, trying to get my attention,
and keeping pace with me as I was sucked up toward the sky. I had the
impression that they wanted to get inside the tube, to go where I was
going, and that they were frustrated by being stuck outside. I was aware
that I had taken acid and was hallucinating, but the kind of cohesion
and consistency of these visions, this entirely new world created out of
thin air, was unlike anything I had experienced before, with or without
drugs. As I was floating up the glass tube alongside these roundish,
colorful beings, I remember thinking to myself that this must be some
kind of challenge or quest: “<em>I’ve got to find a way to communicate
with these things, but we don’t have a language in common. How can I
communicate with them?</em>” I felt that if I could find some common
ground with the creatures, we would be able to establish a basis for
communication. Well, it didn’t happen. My mind was a blank. If it was a
quest, I failed it. I soon outpaced the creatures and they disappeared.</p>
<p>I was being sucked up into the sky faster and faster now, and was able
to see that there was an end to the tube, and at the end of it was white
light… blinding, glorious, perfect light beyond imagining. I was moving
so fast now that almost immediately after first glimpsing the light, I
was pulled into it and merged with it. And this was far and away the
most ecstatic experience of my life so far. Because now I was one with
what felt like universal consciousness. It was an utterly mind-blowing
experience. I thought <em>this</em> must be what the Christian mystics meant
when they said “God”. But it wasn’t the personal God of a Michelangelo
painting. It wasn’t a man up in the sky who was like me, only big and
powerful; it was everything that was or had been or could ever be, and
it was self-aware. And in that moment of merging with what seemed to be
universal consciousness, it was as though I knew everything there was to
know; everything that needed to be known was known, and yet there was no
need to ask. This felt really good. Beyond good. Perfect, exquisite,
ecstatic, flawless… superlatives fail to capture it. I marveled to
myself, “<em>Everything up until now, my entire life, has been a dream.
Only now am I awake. Only this is real.</em>” And almost immediately I
realized that it was going to end. I was going to be kicked out of the
garden. Later, I wrote in my journal, “As I lay naked beneath God’s
crushing foot, I asked Him to throw me a bone: ‘<em>Nobody is going to
believe this. I’m going to need some proof. Give me something to take
back with me.’</em>” This experience of merger with something infinitely
larger than myself made everything else pale in comparison, and already
I could see that it would end and that I would have nothing to show for
it. There was a moment of profound grief. A moment later, I found myself
back in my room, lying on my bed facing upward, exhilarated, exhausted,
annihilated and reborn.</p>
<p>Now, as it happened, my cocaine addiction vanished in that moment; I
have not used cocaine since. There was no aversion, no negative feeling
about the drug. I just wasn’t interested anymore. My reaction to being
offered cocaine was similar to what I imagine might happen if someone
offered me a plate of cold, raw tofu: “No thanks, I don’t much like
cold, raw tofu.” There was no offense and no judgmentalism, only
disinterest. It later occurred to me that this might be the “bone” I had
asked for, the objective proof that something remarkable had happened.
As to who it was that granted me this boon of the bone, my thinking has
changed over the years. I no longer believe I was having a conversation
with an “Eternal Being,” or even that there is such a thing, although I
did believe that for a long time after the event. My current speculation
is that what happened that day was an internal event, a function of the
interplay between a brain, a psychoactive substance, meditation, and a
traumatic life situation. One way or the other, the experience was
deeply moving and may have saved my life in addition to setting me on a
new course.</p>
<p>The experience of union showed me a reality beyond my ordinary self, but
it was only a short-lived glimpse. I found myself on a quest to
understand what had happened to me and to “get it back.” With the
assumption that what I had glimpsed was somehow truer than my ordinary
life, I wanted to be able to access it again, and ultimately find a way
to feel like that all the time. I was now officially a seeker, but I
didn’t know how to seek. For many years following that experience, I
couldn’t escape the feeling that I was somehow “doing it wrong.” I
experienced myself as alien, but I remembered that it was possible to be
complete, and I was determined to feel that way again.</p>
<p>Although both meditation and drugs were involved in that first big
opening, my intuitive sense was that the way forward was through
meditation, not drugs; it seemed to me that while drugs might
temporarily open windows in the mind, a more systematic approach would
be required to keep them open. So, I began meditating each day while I
did some research.</p>
<p>I began by reading self-improvement books, a genre I had previously
regarded with contempt. I read the likes of Dr. Wayne Dyer about how to
realize your potential as a human being. That was a place to start, but
it wasn’t zoomed in enough on where I wanted to go. On a recommendation
from a friend, I bought a copy of the Ram Dass book <em>Be Here Now</em>. This
was getting closer. Ram Dass made vague but tantalizing references to
spiritual awakening, spinning interesting and implausible yarns about
his guru, who he considered to be a “fully realized being.” From there,
I began reading Buddhist books, getting ever closer to what I really
wanted, which was an instruction manual. I read Alan Watts on Zen wisdom
and then <em>The Three Pillars</em> of Zen by Philip Kapleau. I also read
Ouspensky’s book about Gurdjieff, and took a brief detour into New Age
books like <em>Seth Speaks</em> and Richard Bach’s <em>Illusions</em>. I found all
sorts of hints, a drop of wisdom, a dollop of childish nonsense, and a
large portion of snake oil, but no method. In 1989, I read Ken Wilber’s
<em>Spectrum of Consciousness</em>. Wilber was the first author I had found who
bridged the gap between a nebulous and impractical pursuit of spiritual
enlightenment and a more concrete understanding that could be approached
systematically and reconciled with common sense and science. By talking
about levels of mind that could be targeted by specific practices,
Wilber made spiritual awakening/enlightenment sound like a realistic
project. But he did not offer a method. I had been an almost daily
meditator for seven years, ever since my big opening in 1982; I was
willing to do the work if someone could give me the instructions. In
<em>Spectrum of Consciousness</em>, Wilber mentioned in passing that he was
offering a conceptual framework as opposed to a method, and that
resources abounded for those who sought a more hands-on approach. I was
frustrated. I had no idea what resources he was referring to. I
continued to practice without a teacher.</p>
<p>Fast forward to 1990, eight years after my first unitive experience. My
depression had returned. I made my living as a bass player in a dance
rock band. Sometimes I would find myself onstage in front of a hundred
people, on the verge of tears for no reason that I could name. I
couldn’t play music anymore. I quit the band in North Carolina, where I
had moved two years earlier to pursue my musical career, and moved back
to Southern California. I promised myself I would never again perform
music for money. All I wanted to do was meditate. My most cherished
fantasy involved checking myself into a cave in the Himalayas and living
as a monk for the rest of my life.</p>
</section>
<section id="bill-hamilton">
<h2><span class="section-number">1.2. </span>Bill Hamilton</h2>
<p>When I moved back to Southern California, I had my mail forwarded from
the post office in Chapel Hill. A few weeks after arriving in
California, a postcard arrived, forwarded from my old address. It was a
simple white postcard with some dot matrix computer-printed text on it,
advertising a series of audiocassette recordings of discussions between
the Dalai Lama and western scientists. It sounded intriguing, so I
decided to order the tapes, which would set me back about twenty bucks.
Reading the phone number on the postcard, I noticed that the area code
and prefix were from a town not more than a half hour’s drive from where
I was now living. Excited, I called the number and said I’d like to
order the tape set, and that I was nearby, just half an hour away. The
man on the other end of the line, whose name was Bill Hamilton, said he
was a meditation teacher and invited me for a visit.</p>
<p>My first impulse was to impress Bill with what I knew about Buddhism and
spirituality, because I was used to thinking of myself as a big deal;
I’d had this thing happen to me that most people hadn’t had, or at least
weren’t talking about. But within two minutes of meeting Bill, I
realized he wasn’t speculating; he knew far more about meditation and
awakening than I did. I stopped talking and started listening.</p>
<p>Bill was twenty-five years older than I. He was gawky and tall, about
6’1”. He had white hair, a Prince Valiant haircut, and a short white
beard. He was affable, humorous, and just slightly socially awkward,
with a tendency toward malapropisms. In spite of the occasional mis-used
word, though, Bill Hamilton was a masterful communicator. He was
eloquent, articulate, creative, and had a special way with concepts. And
he was the king of the one-liners. When I asked Bill what it felt like
to be enlightened, he said, “Suffering less. Noticing it more.” Bill was
a natural entrepreneur. He had founded the Dharma Seed Tape Library as a
volunteer at Insight Meditation Society (IMS) in 1983 but had since
moved on and was now subsisting solely on the proceeds of his own mail
order cassette tape business, Insight Recordings. He had a couple of
professional dubbing machines in his apartment, and did all of his own
promotion and bookkeeping on his computer. Bill liked to modify his own
computers; he had several, and they were always breaking down. He liked
to laugh about “computer follies,” which was his way of referring to all
the time he spent jury-rigging his machines. He also had a 35mm SLR
camera that he would drag out randomly to shoot pictures. Bill had been
married and divorced three times, and was now alone.</p>
<p>Bill became my mentor. I drove the 20 miles to his apartment every
Sunday afternoon for a personalized dharma talk, a hangout, and 45
minutes of formal sitting meditation. The first thing Bill taught me was
to use Mahasi Sayadaw’s (Footnote here with link to noting definition
and instructions.) mental noting technique instead of the Zen breath
counting exercise I’d learned from a book. And every Sunday evening,
when I left Bill’s house to drive home, I would be on cloud nine, full
of hope and optimism, and a deep calm that felt like the most precious
gift in the world, and the only thing worth pursuing in an otherwise
confusing and pointless existence. I did not understand why spending
time with this old man affected me so profoundly.</p>
<p>One of the things that struck me about Bill was his willingness to walk
his talk. The first day I met him, he needed to go to his storage unit
to get something out of it. Since Bill drove an old yellow Volkswagon
bug, he asked me to drive him there in my Honda wagon, which had more
cargo space. At the storage unit, rummaging around in boxes, Bill found
a black widow spider. I would’ve just killed it, but Bill left it alone.
When I asked him why, he told me that one of the five precepts of
Theravada Buddhism was to avoid killing. I was impressed by the fact
that he not only knew about these precepts, but actually followed them,
unwilling to kill so much as a bug. Inspired by Bill’s example, I too
adopted the precept to avoid killing “sentient beings,” and for years I
didn’t kill insects either. Incidentally, a few years later I was on
retreat at Bill’s Whidbey Island Retreat, which was his retreat center
(made available by a generous friend) in Washington State, consisting of
20 acres of pine forest and Bill’s tiny trailer, along with an extra
motor home for a yogi or two to stay in. I was the only student there at
the time. One day, I saw Bill smack a mosquito. I said, “I see you’re no
longer abstaining from killing insects.” Bill said, “Last time I was [on
meditation retreat] in Burma I felt like killing them. So I did.” Bill
had been following the non-killing precept for years. I interpreted this
not as backsliding, but as progress. Notwithstanding the beauty of a
life without killing, Bill had come to a place in his practice and his
life where he could question even his own dogma.</p>
<p>Compared to everything I’d heard and read previously, Bill’s model of
enlightenment was simple and clear. He told me about the four “Paths of
Enlightenment” of Theravada Buddhism, discrete developmental landmarks
that could be attained by systematically applying the vipassana
technique. [The first of the four paths is called stream entry, and is
discussed in greater detail in Chapter X as part of the method.]
Together, the four paths form a map of what can happen when a meditator
does vipassana practice. [I will be presenting my interpretation of
these stages in Chapter X, “Get Stream Entry”, as one tried and true
programs for developing contemplative fitness, a method I have seen work
for dozens of students.] If you read traditional descriptions of these
four paths, you will find references to future rebirths (and lack
thereof), saints, “fetters,” and “purification.” If, on the other hand,
you strip away the jargon, magical thinking, gratuitous mythology, and
hero-worship, while making healthy allowances for hyperbole and
hagiography, the four-path model can be interpreted as describing an
organic process of human development. (Editor’s note: Link to a section
describing my interpretation of the four path model explaining why I
reject the idea that I am “redefining” the model; my contention is that
there is no One Correct Way (orthodoxy) to interpret ancient teachings,
by which all other interpretations must be judged (and found lacking).)</p>
<p>In other words, the ancient Buddhists were <em>onto</em> something. Bill was
talking about something do-able, and he believed there were many people
living today who had these attainments, including <em>arahatship</em> (fourth
of the four paths), or “full enlightenment” according to Theravada
Buddhism. Bill gave me to understand through indirect speech that he
himself had attained at least the second of these four paths of
enlightenment. Finally, after eight years of reading fairy tales culled
from a Zen master’s fantasy, I was sitting across the table from a man
who asserted that there <em>was</em> something called enlightenment, and that
he had it. Or at least that he had some significant amount of it, and
was working towards getting more of it. (Purists, don’t despair at the
irony of <em>getting</em> enlightenment as though it were a side of bacon in
the butcher shop window. We’ll discuss the pros and cons of
“<a class="reference external" href="https://www.amazon.com/Cutting-Through-Spiritual-Materialism-Chogyam/dp/1570629579">spiritual materialism</a><span class="link-target"> [https://www.amazon.com/Cutting-Through-Spiritual-Materialism-Chogyam/dp/1570629579]</span>“
in a later section. For now, suffice to say that it was precisely the
clarity of language made possible by the acquisitive approach to
awakening that made it possible for me to jump in with both feet.)</p>
</section>
<section id="first-long-retreats">
<h2><span class="section-number">1.3. </span>First Long Retreats</h2>
<p>Within a few months of meeting Bill, he had convinced me to commit to a
three-month-long intensive meditation retreat at Insight Meditation
Society in Massachusetts. When he first suggested it, I balked; the
prospect of spending three months in silence, meditating all day long,
every day, was daunting. But I soon warmed up to the idea. The
guidelines for the three-month retreat called for several weeks of
prerequisite meditation retreats before attending such a long program.
But Bill had connections at IMS, having spent most of the 80s there as a
“long term yogi,” living in the unfinished basement of the facility,
attending all the retreats and recording the dharma talks. He pulled
some strings and got me signed up. I spent the fall of 1991 on retreat.
I kept a journal of the entire ordeal. When I returned home around
Christmas time, I sat down with Bill to tell him about it, reading
directly from my notes. I read for two hours straight, and literally put
Bill to sleep at one point. I pretended not to notice that he was
snoring and kept reading. After listening to my report, Bill told me
that I had gone through ten of the sixteen stages leading up to stream
entry or “first path,” the first level of enlightenment according to the
Theravada map. I had not attained stream entry, but I was close.
Remarkably, Bill was able to extract some useful information from my
long-winded story. It took me years to figure out that my vipassana
teachers didn’t care what I <em>thought</em> about my meditation. No matter how
important it seemed to me, they couldn’t glean much information from my
opinions and psychological or philosophical commentary. They wanted to
hear about what <em>actually happened</em>, in clear, simple terms. The ability
to distinguish experience from thoughts about experience is key to both
effective practice and effective reporting. By comparing
phenomenological descriptions of my experience to the developmental map
they carried in their heads, they could tentatively place me on that map
and give me targeted advice on how to develop further.</p>
<p>Based on my report, Bill was able to neatly line up my experiences with
the Progress of Insight map. (Footnote to P of I essay.) He showed me,
point by point, were I was and where I had been. About halfway through
the retreat, for example, I’d fallen into a notoriously difficult
stretch of territory, and languished in it for the remainder of my time
in Massachusetts, meditating less, sleeping more, ruminating and
worrying, journaling, shuffling about the retreat center in a funk, and
generally wasting time. Bill explained that all of this was predictable,
and that if I’d spent more time meditating and less time thinking and
writing during the second half of the retreat, I might well have moved
through this difficult stage and on to next, which was, by the way, a
distinctly more agreeable state. I might even have attained stream
entry! I pointed out that this would have been valuable information to
have in real time. “Why didn’t my interview teachers tell me what <em>you</em>
just told me?”</p>
<p>Bill grinned. “IMS is a mushroom factory.”</p>
<p>I didn’t catch the reference, so he explained: ”Keep ‘em in the dark and
feed ‘em shit.”</p>
<p>How to explain the impact of one comment on my entire life? The IMS
teachers had treated us, the students, like “mushrooms.” I was stunned,
later enraged. I found it appalling that teachers would withhold such
valuable information. Surely, if I had known that my discouragement,
confusion, and lack of motivation were normal, typical, temporary, and
the entirely predictable consequence of a particular phase of
developmental that was first mapped over 2,000 years ago, I would have
practiced differently and had a more successful retreat.</p>
<p>My commitment to full disclosure about states and stages was born with
Bill Hamilton’s “mushroom” comment. Much of my teaching since 1991 has
been a reaction to what I came to think of as the “mushroom culture” of
mainstream Western Buddhism. The antidote to the mushroom culture was
the simple dissemination of information. I railed (and still rail)
against the presumption, patriarchy, and authoritarianism that leads a
few teachers to withhold information from their students. This theme
later became a movement, when my friend Daniel Ingram, having heard my
story and later having experienced the mushroom culture for himself,
wrote about it in his 2003 book, <em>Mastering the Core Teachings of the
Buddha</em>.</p>
<p>Bill suggested that I go to Asia, check myself into a monastery, and get
stream entry. So that’s what I decided to do. At the time, I only cared
about meditation. The rest of my life didn’t matter. Bill told me:
“Everything you do in order to make your next retreat possible is part
of your practice.” I found this vastly empowering; now it was possible
to view all aspects of my life as supporting my practice, rather than
getting in the way of it. I had a job delivering pizzas at Domino’s
Pizza, which was demoralizing due to the low wage. Again, Bill came to
the rescue: “Just figure out how many pizzas you need to hustle to buy a
ticket to Burma. Then, get busy.” I got busy. Although I didn’t earn
much at the pizza store, my goal was concrete, and I could see progress
each day as my piggy bank filled up. I sold my car and bought a one-way
ticket to Malaysia, understanding that I was going to meditate at a
Burmese-style monastery in Penang while applying for a visa to continue
on to Burma. I didn’t know when or whether I would return home. In fact,
returning home was the furthest thing from my mind. I planned to get
enlightened. I was steeped in the four paths model of enlightenment that
I’d learned from Bill, and I wanted to get not just first, but also
second path before returning home from Asia, however long that might
take. [I no longer view the four paths model and the progress of insight
map as the only way to model contemplative development, but it is a
useful tool (lens) for diagnostics and teaching that consistently leads
to results.]</p>
<p>I remember saying to Sayadaw U Rajinda, the Burmese monk who was both my
interview teacher and abbot of Malaysian Buddhist Meditation Centre in
Penang, “I’m going to stay in Asia until I get 2nd path.” U Rajinda
smiled approvingly, and in his deep, resonant voice, said, “Good plan.”
This was powerful validation; now, both Bill Hamilton and Sayadaw U
Rajinda were on my team, and both of them took this as seriously as I
did. Enlightenment was real and doable. I stayed in Malaysia for six
months. U Rajinda was my teacher throughout that time. I saw him later
that year in Burma when he came for a visit, and again in Malaysia after
that. He and I formed a bond. He once drew a picture of me on a scrap of
paper and gave it to me as a gift. It was an image of a shaven-headed
meditator sitting cross-legged in meditation, with the caption “Mr.
Kenneth” printed underneath in English.</p>
<p>Being on retreat in the Mahasi Sayadaw tradition is intense, immersive,
and often grueling. There’s very little to do other than meditate. You
go to sleep at 9:00pm, wake up at 3:00am and meditate, alternating one
hour of sitting with one hour of walking meditation. Sometimes I would
wake up at 2:00am. If you whittle it down to four hours of sleep by
going to bed at 10:00pm and waking up at 2:00am, you earn a smile from
the monks and a sense of macho satisfaction. After breakfast, there is a
work period. They give you a piece of a plant, something like a palm
frond, to use as a broom, and you might spend 10 minutes sweeping the
floor of the meditation hall. An ordinary broom would be more effective,
but there is apparently some sort of ceremonial significance to the
frond, and after all, it’s not as though we were pressed for time. After
work period, it’s back to meditation, all day long, with a break for
lunch at 10:00am. Lunch is the last meal of the day; monks are not
allowed to eat after noon, and there were no special provisions for
those of us practicing as lay people to sneak in an extra meal.</p>
<p>A little bit of talking is allowed, especially if it is about
meditation, but anything beyond five or ten minutes a day is met with
disapproval. As such, most of the adventures occur internally. Looking
at the workings of your own mind is rarely dull, and you encounter the
whole range of experience, from “this is the most wonderful, amazing
experience possible for a human and I never want to leave retreat” to “I
hate everything about this and I’ve got to get out of this hell hole
immediately.” The deep compulsion to let the process run its course, to
find out where it was going, was so strong that I stayed for an entire
year the first time, and for months at a time in two subsequent trips to
Southeast Asian monasteries.</p>
<p>Within about two months of starting my retreat in Malaysia, meditation
had become uneventful. All of the big, exciting, “wow” things of my
earlier practice had passed and I was just sitting, quiet and
comfortable. This is the stage called “insight knowledge of equanimity”
on the Progress of Insight map, the stage just beyond where I had gotten
on my IMS retreat in Massachusetts. One day, sitting after lunch,
something changed. I fell so deeply into meditation, it was almost as
though I went to sleep, or lost consciousness for a moment. And then,
suddenly, I perked up and said to myself, “Was that it? I think that was
it.”</p>
<p>According to the Mahasi interpretation, stream entry and subsequent path
moments are signaled by an event called a “cessation.” [More on this in
Chapter X.] A cessation, by this interpretation, is a blip out, a loss
of consciousness, typically for just a brief moment, although in some
cases it might last longer. Now you’re here, now you’re not, now you’re
back, with no sense of the passage of time and no memory of what
happened in the interim. The first time this occurs, it signals stream
entry. I instantly recognized my experience that afternoon as stream
entry, based on what I had heard and read about the phenomenon. Bill
Hamilton had characterized stream entry as a great anticlimax compared
to experiences that often precede it, like my first mind-shattering
opening in 1982. Although such powerful unitive experiences are often
assumed to be enlightenment by those who experience them, they are, at
least according to the Theravada Buddhist tradition, preliminary stages;
Bill said that the initial unitive opening is to stream entry as the
germination of a seed is to the blossom that eventually grows from it.</p>
<p>After attaining stream entry in Malaysia, I got up from the cushion and
walked around the monastery laughing for a day or two. I felt free. Life
was good. I suddenly had access to jhanas. Jhanas are pleasant,
discrete, reproducible altered states of consciousness, each more
refined and exquisite than the next. [I will present the jhanas as part
of the method, in Chapters X, Y.] I found that I suddenly had access to
four of these states. I had heard a little bit about the jhanas and what
they were supposed to be like, but this was my first experience with
them. The first four jhanas would normally arise in order during a
sitting: one, two, three, four. But I also found that I had random
access, and could jump to any jhana from any other, just by intending to
do so. The jhanas appeared as discrete channels to which I could attune
the mind, much like moving the dial of an old-fashioned radio. The depth
and clarity of these new meditative states was completely different from
the day before. I took this as further validation of stream entry.</p>
<p>Within hours of the event, I went to Sayadaw U Rajinda’s room and
knocked on his door to request an impromptu interview, something I had
never done before. I told him what had happened and hinted that I
understood this to be stream entry. U Rajinda hinted that he thought so
too, and gave me the new instruction to note “pleasant” and “unpleasant”
while sitting, and sent me back out to meditate some more. “Pleasant
experiences may arise in your sittings and they may stay for a long
time,” he said. “Be sure to note ‘pleasant’ when this happens.” After
six months in Malaysia (and a great deal of pleasantness), I flew to
Burma, where I would spend another six months at Panditarama Meditation
Center in Rangoon. My teacher there was the famous and cantankerous
Sayadaw U Pandita, abbot of Panditarama, highly decorated scholar, and
celebrated master of the technical aspects of meditation. In his
community, he was affectionately known as “Sayadawgyi” (pronounced
“sigh-a-dow JEE”) meaning “Big Sayadaw.” <em>Sayadaw</em> is itself an
honorific meaning “elder monk.” There were lots of Sayadaws in Burma,
but there was only one Sayadaw Gi at Panditarama.</p>
<p>U Pandita was interested in spreading the Buddhist teachings outside of
Burma, so he spent a lot of time with the foreign yogis, charging his
lieutenants with the supervision of the local Burmese students. We
foreigners (non-Burmese yogis, both Asian and Western), interviewed with
Sayadaw U Pandita several times a week, and we heard dharma talks by him
on the days we weren’t interviewing. The interviews were done through an
interpreter, even though U Pandita was able to understand a bit of
English. Interviews were one-on-one, but were done in front of the
entire group of 10–15 foreigners, so we all got to hear all the
interviews.</p>
<p>Several times a week, I would spend half an hour or so talking privately
with U Vivekananda, a German monk and disciple of U Pandita who has
since become a Sayadaw in his own right, and abbot of Panditarama
Lumbini in Nepal. U Vivekananda spoke perfect English and was more
forthcoming than Sayadaw U Pandita. Monk’s rules prevented him from
being completely open in our discussions, especially with regard to his
own experience, but I could ask him questions that I couldn’t ask U
Pandita.</p>
<p>Much about the authoritarian structure and hierarchy of the monastery
was difficult for me. Having to bow three times, on hands and knees,
forehead to the floor, before and after each interview with Sayadaw U
Pandita seemed like a charming custom at first, but eventually it was
just annoying. I wanted to engage U Pandita in discussion, and in my
more grandiose moments I even fantasized about educating him about what
I considered to be certain superior aspects of Western culture. Once, I
brought this up to U Vivekananda after a frosty encounter with U
Pandita. The German monk said. “Never argue with Sayadaw. He simply
can’t <em>tolerate</em> it.” This was obviously true, and part of the challenge
of monastery life was suppressing my own psychological need for open
engagement on a level playing field; there was no opportunity for that
whatsoever. I reminded myself again and again that it was worth the
pain; I was getting something that I couldn’t have gotten anywhere else.
So I stayed on.</p>
<p>There is a common misconception that a high level of contemplative
development will necessarily transform a human being into a lovable,
likable, caring, infinitely compassionate, and utterly sanitized cartoon
saint. Sayadaw U Pandita was living proof that this was not so; he
displayed the whole range of emotion. Although he could at times be
loving, kind, and supportive, more often he appeared angry, irritated,
cutting and sarcastic. In short, he was a mean old man. Between my
instinct for self-preservation and the powerful taboo against outright
disclosure, I judged it unwise to simply tell U Pandita that I believed
I had attained stream entry. All I could tell him was what I was
experiencing in my individual meditation sessions.</p>
<p>When I first arrived in Burma, I was still in the review phase after
stream entry, a kind of afterglow that follows attainment of a path.
This left me without much motivation for precise reporting; my
meditations were often so blissful that I would just sit and bask in
pleasure for an hour or more at a time. I wasn’t able to adequately
describe the precise phenomenology of those experiences, so to U Pandita
I was just being sloppy. He shouted, “You are dull, dreamy, drifty! This
is not acceptable!” He would angrily hold forth on the inferiority of
western yogis in general and Americans in particular. “You Americans,
you think you can do it your way! But here in Burma, there’s only <em>one</em>
way, and that is <em>my</em> way!” It would have been funny, had it not been so
intimidating. Kneeling on the floor of a monastery in a foreign land,
with the legendary Sayadaw U Pandita sitting cross-legged on his throne
above me, surrounded by his disciple monks, my Western notions of
equality did not apply.</p>
<p>I became obsessed with U Pandita. His presence filled my world. Every
waking moment was spent reflecting on our conversations and his
criticisms, along with imagined conversations in which I would
skillfully refute his attacks. But there was no future in this and I
knew it. My two options were to either follow Sayadaw’s instructions, or
to leave the retreat. After several weeks of internal turmoil and barely
restrained resentment during interviews, my resistance collapsed. In my
mind, I bowed to U Pandita and said, “I surrender. You’re the king. What
do you want me to do?” U Pandita recognized the change at our very next
interview. As soon as I began to do things his way, I saw the kind and
supportive side of the man. He smiled. “So now… you look like a yogi!”</p>
<p>What Sayadaw U Pandita wanted was for me to be almost painfully simple
in my reporting. He wanted me to say, for example, “when I observe the
rise and fall of the abdomen, I feel pressure, tightness, coolness,
warmth, softness. I feel mind states of fear, annoyance, joy,
equanimity.” These kinds of bare-bones explanations gave him the
information he needed to gauge my progress, place me on a map of
development, and give targeted advice. It was very important to him that
I not space out or get into sleepy, dreamy, states, and that I report in
simple, concrete terms, with little or no interpretation or commentary.</p>
<p>I did not attain 2nd Path on this first Asian retreat, in spite of my
earlier promise to Sayadaw U Rajinda during my stay in Malaysia. After
about a year of intensive meditation in the austere conditions of
Buddhist monasteries, I was sick and exhausted. I had lost 60 pounds of
bodyweight, going from 200 to 140 in 12 months. It was time to fly back
to the States and rest.</p>
</section>
<section id="alaska">
<h2><span class="section-number">1.4. </span>Alaska</h2>
<p>While I was in Asia, my parents bought a cabin by a lake near Haines,
Alaska, and got to know some people there, including a locally famous
artist and woodcarver. He had been to India as a spiritual seeker when
he was young, and understood the culture shock of returning home after
immersion in another culture. When he heard that I was returning from a
year-long retreat in Southeast Asia, he suggested to my parents that I
come live with him and his family and work in his art gallery as I
reintegrated into American culture. And that’s what I did. The artist
taught me the art of woodcarving in his unique style, which was in
heavily influenced by Northwest Coast Indian Art.</p>
<p>I was also involved in community theater in Haines. We performed a
melodrama every Saturday and Sunday night in the summertime for the
tourists who came on cruise ships. Occasionally we’d do a big production
as well, and when we performed <em>Fiddler on the Roof</em>, I played Fyedka,
the Russian boyfriend. My Alaskan adventure was a magical time, a
creative time, and the calm and clarity of mind resulting from a year of
intensive meditation practice made the breathtaking natural beauty of
Southeast Alaska seem all the more exquisite.</p>
<p>Shortly after arriving in Alaska, a local woman recruited me to teach
meditation, and I led a weekly sitting group. I would give talks and
teach basic techniques like following the breath and noting in the
Mahasi style. I also taught the model of the four paths model of
enlightenment that I’d learned from Bill Hamilton and my Asian teachers,
and spoke of stream entry as a realistic goal. I made no secret of the
fact that I believed I had attained stream entry. These views were met,
for the most part, with resistance or indifference, but there were a
handful of people who became my friends and came regularly to the weekly
sittings.</p>
<p>Most people in that tiny Alaskan town thought of me as a kind of odd
quasi-monk. I didn’t date throughout the time I spent in Alaska, mainly
because the women I was interested in attended my sitting group, and it
was clear to me that it wasn’t a good idea for teachers to date their
students. So I continued my monkish ways. My parents were spending the
summers in their cabin 26 miles outside of town, so every weekend my
father would pick me up and we would drive out to the cabin together. My
dad was an avid, even obsessive, fisherman. He and I would go fishing
every weekend, both Saturday and Sunday, on a nearby river or on the
lake just outside the cabin’s back door. Mother was an intellectual and
a reader; she and I would discuss ideas in the evening, sitting at the
table in the one-room cabin as Dad lovingly cared for his fishing
tackle. In the wintertime, Mom and Dad would drive back to their place
in Oregon, and I spent my first Alaskan winter alone in the cabin by the
now frozen lake. There was no electricity. Illumination was courtesy of
gaslights, and the cabin’s only heat source was a leaky old Franklin
stove that required constant attention and had an insatiable appetite
for firewood. I spent a lot of time alone that first winter, splitting
wood, feeding the stove, reading, and meditating.</p>
<p>I returned to Southeast Asia twice for retreats during the period I
called Alaska home; two months in Malaysia for the first trip, and four
months for the second, half in Malaysia and half in Burma. My teacher in
Burma on my third Asian retreat was the lovable Sayadaw U Kundala, a
direct disciple of Mahasi Sayadaw who was as famous as U Pandita in
Burma, but less well known in the West. It was on this retreat with U
Kundala that I attained second path. Both stream entry and second path
were so obvious to me that I didn’t require validation from my teachers.
Nontheless, Sayadaw U Kundala validated me. I described the
phenomenology of the
cessations I was experiencing, which at the time I experienced as
cluster of visual freeze frames, often in quick succession, and U
Kundala declared: “Oh, this is <em>magga phala</em>!” <em>Magga</em> and <em>phala</em> are
the Pali words for “path” and “fruition,” respectively. I explained that
I had experienced this once before, two years earlier in Malaysia, and
had been through the stages of the Progress of Insight before as well.
Sayadaw U Kundala acknowledged this and even taught me how to use
resolutions to re-experience the cessations of stream entry and second
path, which were subtly different.</p>
<p>I was impressed by how open Sayadaw U Kundala and many of the Burmese
Buddhists were in talking about meditative attainments and progress.
There seemed to be a whole culture of acknowledging attainment at U
Kundala’s monastery. According to Buddhist tradition, giving a gift to
someone who has attained some level of enlightenment accrues spiritual
merit to the giver, so as word got out (various people were able to
overhear my interviews with U Kundala) that a Western student was making
progress, people began to come to my room and offer me gifts, including
some beautiful silk sarongs and a warm Russian-style furry hat with
earflaps for chilly Rangoon mornings in the cool season.</p>
<p>When I finished the retreat and was ready to leave Burma, I got a ride
to the airport from a man who was a board member at the monastery. He
was clearly well connected in Rangoon, because when we get to the
airport, he waved his hand at a bunch of soldiers with assault rifles,
causing them to stand back and let me pass, so that I didn’t have to
wait in the customs line with the other hapless tourists. As I was
walking away, the man from the monastery waved goodbye and shouted to me
across the crowded airport, “You got two! Come back for a third,” in a
less-than-veiled reference to the four paths of enlightenment.</p>
<p>I had remained in touch with Bill Hamilton throughout my time in Alaska,
and would periodically go to California or Bill’s Whidbey Island Retreat
in Washington to spend time with him or to do a silent retreat.
Returning from my third Asian trip, I stopped by Whidbey Island. Bill
confirmed my attainment of second path in his characteristic indirect
style; I later heard from a mutual friend, “Bill said you attained
second path!” This was part of the odd, roundabout way in which Bill
liked to communicate about attainments. In my own teaching, I have taken
the Burmese willingness to talk about attainments one step further; I
speak openly about my own attainments and freely give my opinion to my
students about where I think they can be placed on a developmental map.
[It’s worth pointing out that I don’t consider myself the final arbiter
of other people’s attainments. I’m not in a position to validate or
invalidate other people’s attainments; I can only give my opinion. An
attainment either happens or it doesn’t, irrespective of anyone’s
opinion including the teacher and the student herself.]</p>
</section>
<section id="deeper-into-jhana">
<h2><span class="section-number">1.5. </span>Deeper Into Jhana</h2>
<p>After attaining second path and returning from Asia, I spent several
months meditating at Bill Hamilton’s Whidbey Island Retreat. I had
gained access to the first four jhanas with stream entry, and I now set
out to develop jhanas 5-8, four more altered states commonly described
in Theravada Buddhist literature. I thought of jhana practice as support
for my vipassana practice as well as being interesting in its own right,
and I wanted to be able to access these states on demand. I planned to
do <em>kasina</em> practice, a type of pure concentration practice in which the
attention is held steady on a single object or concept. [I had secretly
done some of this kind of practice on my Asian retreats too, without
telling anyone.] I had a brown plastic sluicing bowl from Burma that I
had bought to bathe from water tanks when I didn’t have access to a
shower, and this bowl was to serve as my kasina. I propped up the bowl
in my tent on Whidbey Island and got to work; the work in this case was
as simple as staring at the bowl for hours at a time. [I was probably
following instructions from the Visudimagga, of which Bill had a copy,
and the “One by one as they occur” sutta (MN 111).] Using this
technique, I was able to develop the fifth jhana within a few days, and
the others followed one after the other until I had access to eight
distinct altered states.</p>
<p>Having attained the first two levels of enlightenment according to the
four paths model, my next landmark would be third path. I had heard a
little about third path from Sayadaw U Pandita and from Bill Hamilton.
It was said that first and second path were fairly straightforward and I
had even heard from Bill Hamilton that first and second path were “a
dime a dozen” in Buddhist circles. But third path was considered more
difficult, rare, and harder to diagnose. And in fact, although my own
attainment of stream entry and second path were self-evident, the exact
moment in which I attained third path is not clear to me.</p>
<p>Some time in the mid–90s, I discovered a new set of jhanas beyond the
eight commonly taught within Buddhism. I was sitting in my car after a
grocery shopping expedition. I remembered reading about a vow that a
Buddha named Amitabha had made. According to what I remembered of the
mythology, Amitabha once vowed that anyone who sincerely invoked his
name would be instantly transported to the Pure Land, a kind of Buddhist
heaven. Notwithstanding my initial experience of mystical union in 1982
and a few brief flirtations with religious concepts, I had remained as
skeptical as ever, and didn’t believe for a moment that there was a
magical Buddha named Amitabha up in the sky, poised to intervene on my
behalf. Still, I well understood the power of metaphor and suggestion in
human experience, so I decided to try an experiment. With as much
sincerity as I could muster, I invoked Amitabha Buddha by repeating the
phrase “Namo Amitabha” over and over. Almost immediately, I entered a
state of boundless gratitude and happiness that I hadn’t felt before.
This was a discrete altered state, but not one of the eight jhanas I was
already familiar with. This new state was so pleasant and profound that
one of my first thoughts was I would happily toss away all of the
previous eight jhanas in return for this one. I found that I could
conjure up this new jhana at will by picturing Amitabha Buddha in his
traditional red robes, by recalling the sense of boundless gratitude, or
by focusing on the “third eye” area in the middle of my forehead, which
was experienced prominently in this state. I dubbed this new state the
“Pure Land jhana,” since it had come from the Pure Land Buddhist
practice of invoking Amitabha Buddha. A few months later, I went on
another retreat with Bill at Whidbey Island and discovered another
altered state in the same mental territory as the Pure Land jhana. It
wasn’t the same state as the Pure Land jhana, but was of similar
character, so I began thinking of these states as Pure Land One and Pure
Land Two.</p>
<p>While I was cultivating the Pure Land jhanas on Whidbey Island, I
received a letter from my good friend and former meditation student
Daniel Ingram in which he claimed access to a state called nirodha
samapatti. [The Pure Land jhanas and nirodha samapatti are discussed in
more detail in Chapter X.] Nirodha samapatti (NS) is a special
meditative phenomenon that is said to only be accessible to <em>anagamis</em>
(those who had attained the third path of enlightenment) and <em>arahats</em>
(fourth path practitioners, the “fully enlightened”). I once heard U
Pandita describe NS during a dharma talk in Rangoon as “a way of
accessing nibbana” [Nibbana is the Pali word for the Sanskrit Nirvana.]
that “those nobles ones, the <em>anagamis</em> and <em>arahats</em>” had in their
bag of tricks. The developmental aspect got my attention; if only 3rd
path yogis and beyond had access to nirodha samapatti, then access to NS
was necessarily a key diagnostic criterion. To access NS was to be an
anagami, a developmental attainment supposedly so lofty that most modern
Buddhist practitioners did not consider it a reasonable goal. And here
was my friend Daniel claiming to have access to NS, and accordingly
claiming to have attained third path. I didn’t believe him. I wrote back
to Daniel suggesting that he get over himself and keep practicing. Years
later, though, perhaps in 2003, I found that I also was able to access
to a curious state that seemed to line up with textual descriptions of
nirodha samapatti. Daniel and I compared notes and seemed to be
experiencing the same thing. Together and separately, we have since
heard many of our students describe a similar phenomenon.</p>
<p>In the face of the prevailing Buddhist culture, which holds that we live
in a degenerate age and that it is not possible for modern humans to
achieve the same levels of awakening as the great mystics of the past,
it is natural to ask whether what I identify as nirodha samapatti is the
same phenomenon described by the ancients. Unfortunately, I cannot know
the answer to this question. I can never be sure that any of the
experiences described by others correspond exactly with my own, and this
kind of comparative mind-mapping becomes all the more difficult if the
other people involved are dead or unwilling to talk openly. The larger
issues here are dear to me and have become a mainstay of my practice and
teaching. Are modern people capable of attaining the high levels of
contemplative development spoken of in ancient texts as “awakening”? I
believe we are. In fact, it’s hard for me to imagine what would prevent
it. To the extent that the accomplishments of ancient meditators seem
beyond our reach, I suspect it has more to do with hyperbole and
hagiography than with any inadequacy on the part of modern humans. I
believe it is realistic for us to reach and even go beyond the
achievements of the ancients and I practice and teach accordingly.
Contemplative fitness is within everyone’s reach, and contemplative
excellence is there for those of us willing to dedicate our lives to its
pursuit. In this, we see yet another parallel between physical and
contemplative fitness. As for the conventional wisdom that awakening not
only leads to but is defined by moral perfection, omniscience, etc., my
answer is simple; I don’t believe there ever was a morally perfected or
omniscient human. Whatever contemplative development the ancients were
describing, it did not entail perfection. And yet, I am convinced that
ancient advocates of meditation were pointing to something real and
infinitely valuable. My ongoing efforts to separate reality from
fantasy, abandoning childish notions of perfection while continuing to
cultivate contemplative excellence are a large part of what motivates my
teaching (and this book.)</p>
</section>
<section id="third-path">
<h2><span class="section-number">1.6. </span>Third Path</h2>
<p>Years after I first came across the two Pure Land jhanas, I found a list
of the 31 realms of existence of Buddhist cosmology on the Internet.
[<a class="reference external" href="http://www.accesstoinsight.org/ptf/dhamma/sagga/loka.html">http://www.accesstoinsight.org/ptf/dhamma/sagga/loka.html</a>] The 31
mythical realms were mapped to jhanas. I’d seen a poster years before,
hanging on the wall in the Malaysian Buddhist Meditation Centre, that
lined up the 31 realms to jhanas in a similar way. In the online map,
there were five realms said to be accessible to anagamis and arahats
only. These were labeled as <em>suddhavasa</em> realms or ”Pure Abodes.” This
was a great “aha” moment for me. From here, it wasn’t much of a stretch
to connect the states I had independently named “Pure Land” jhanas with
these “Pure Abode” realms. Bill Hamilton often spoke of mapping our mind
states to the Buddhist realms. For Bill, the Buddhist realms of
existence were, above all, a mind map; irrespective of whether one
believed they had any independent existence, we could view the realms as
corresponding to layers of mind that were stable enough to be taken as
object and accessed as jhanas. It also seemed plausible that the reason
no one seemed to be talking about or teaching any jhanas beyond the
first eight was that the Pure Abodes were developmental; most people
could not access them, and admitting that you <em>could</em> was tantamount to
claiming to be an anagami, which neither monks (because of the rules of
their order) nor neo-Buddhists steeped in the culture of non-disclosure
were likely to do. There is, to this day, very little information online
about the Pure Land jhanas. Ten years ago, there was even less. So it
was left to me to explore this territory on my own, and see what I could
see. Since I was initially able to access only two such states, the fact
that five pure abodes were listed on the 31 Realms map was provocative
in the extreme. My interest in nirodha samapatti, which was also said to
be accessible only to anagamis and arahats, tied in with this; I
wondered if NS might be one of the five realms in question.</p>
<p>I worked on expanding my understanding of these realms for about a year,
and went on a retreat at the Forest Refuge for this purpose. While
meditating formally, I would ride what I called the “jhanic arc” up and
down through the available strata of mind, and open to the possibility
that there might be another layer above the ones I knew, i.e., above the
second Pure Land jhana. [“Riding the jhanic arc”, a method I invented
for accessing and developing strata of mind, is discussed in Chapter X.]
As a result of this targeted exploration, I found that there was such a
state! A new layer opened up, a new jhana that felt as though it were
from the same family as the two Pure Land jhanas. I still considered the
possibility that nirodha samapatti was one these realms, but I
eventually accessed five discrete Pure Land jhanas, none of which were
nirodha samapatti. I asked myself if nirodha samapatti fell naturally
into the sequence of the set of the pure land jhanas, and as far as I
could tell, it did not. So I ended up with a set of states that can only
be accessed by practitioners who have attained to at least third path:
the five pure land jhanas, and nirodha samapatti. I’ve taught a number
of people to access all five pure land jhanas. As far as I know, no one
has come up with any additional jhanas, so to my knowledge this is the
complete set: the four material jhanas, the four immaterial or formless
jhanas, and the five Pure Land jhanas.</p>
</section>
<section id="disillusionment">
<h2><span class="section-number">1.7. </span>Disillusionment</h2>
<p>I had been led to believe that stream entry and certainly second and
third path were so lofty and quasi-holy that by the time you had them,
you’d basically be on easy street; if your life wasn’t yet a cosmic
bliss out, it was certainly on the way. If anyone had said I would still
be depressed after the second path of enlightenment I wouldn’t have
believed it. But as it happened, by the standard diagnostic criteria I
learned from the Mahasi system, by 1994 I <em>did</em> have second path and I
was <em>still</em> depressed. By 2003, I believed I had attained third path
too, but my life was still in shambles. There was a rift between what
was happening and what I thought <em>ought</em> to be happening. On the one
hand, I was a meditation expert; I had a high level of facility with
altered states, knew a great deal of Buddhist theory, and had had myriad
fascinating and profound experiences. I could easily access jhanas, and
use them to temporarily remedy my problematic mind states, but it wasn’t
enough. Depression and anxiety continued. It seemed to me that my brain
chemistry was seriously fouled up, and this movement via my meditation
practice through what I thought of as an organic, somehow biological
spectrum of development was not addressing my mental health issues. I
was becoming resigned to the conclusion that meditation would help me
accept my depression but would not help me overcome it. I bitterly came
to terms with my depression as a long-term, chronic problem that might
be with me for the rest of my life; in 1999, I begged a friend to take
me by the hand to the county mental health clinic and help me ask the
doctor for antidepressant medication.</p>
<p>My spiritual opening on LSD in 1982 had sent me on a quest for
enlightenment, and I was still caught up in that current. The feeling
that I was on a ride towards enlightenment consumed me. Although I
wouldn’t have been able to articulate it at the time, what I really
wanted was to be done with it; I wanted the ride to stop. My meditation
practice was a blessing and a curse, because I was moving along this
developmental continuum in ways that were rich and fulfilling, and yet
it was torture to wake up each morning with the feeling that something
important remained to be done. I didn’t know how to proceed. My practice
had given me access to entirely new categories of pleasant mind states,
but this access was not reliable. Instability was the curse of third
path. I kept practicing only because I didn’t know what else to do.</p>
</section>
<section id="off-the-ride">
<h2><span class="section-number">1.8. </span>Off the Ride</h2>
<p>In June of 2004, I went on a retreat at Southwest Sangha in New Mexico.
One day, walking under a pepper tree in the desert, I gave myself
permission to be enlightened. I had been practicing obsessively for
twenty-two years, including a cumulative three years on intensive
retreat. I thought of myself as a professional yogi. On this day in New
Mexico, reflecting on the question “have I suffered enough?” I gave
myself permission to be done. I was acutely aware of everything around
me — the sights and sounds of the desert, the feeling of heat on my
skin, the warm breeze on my face, the pulsing in my veins. It suddenly
occurred to me that I <em>was</em> done. The current that had carried me for so
many years had relaxed. The ride that had begun the day I first saw the
white light in 1982, this thing that had taken hold of me and had been
the most important thing in my life for these twenty two years, was
over.</p>
<p>I felt like Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz, clicking her heels three times,
and then waking up to find that she’d been home in her own bed the whole
time, safe and sound. I called my mother the next day and told her what
had happened. “I think I’ve just wasted twenty-two years of my life. The
ride is over and nothing much has changed. But I have never been
happier. There is peace.”</p>
<p>The essential realization that comes from this process is that there
isn’t anyone here to get enlightened. You work tirelessly for years to
get enlightened, only to find out that you couldn’t possibly get
enlightened, because there isn’t anybody here for it to happen to.
Contemplative development, in its purest sense, is learning to see
yourself as process.</p>
<p>I walked back into my little trailer in the desert and wrote on the
calendar, “I see the elephant.” This was a reference to the parable of
the blind men and the elephant.
[<a class="reference external" href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind_men_and_an_elephant">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind_men_and_an_elephant</a>] I’d been
able to see parts of the puzzle before, but now it came together. I saw
the elephant. My depression went away. I weaned myself off of
antidepressants and anti-anxiety medication over a period of several
months. I stopped having trouble sleeping. It does not happen this way
for everyone, but this is what happened to me.</p>
<p>By the way, what is an <em>arahat</em>? According to Theravada Buddhism, an
arahat is a “fully enlightened” being. This person has attained all four
of the Four Paths of enlightenment. Some say arahats are extremely rare,
although in the time of the Buddha, they were apparently as common as
ants at a picnic. Whether there are few arahats or many, or for that
matter, any at all, depends entirely upon the definition of the word. By
one popular definition, an arahat is a kind of superman who has
transcended human emotions. He has “overcome greed, hatred, and
delusion.” In other words, he does not experience <em>or express</em> fear,
anger, hate, lust, envy, nor any other “afflictive” emotion. By this
definition, it’s not surprising that there don’t seem to be many around.
In fact, I doubt there ever was a person like that, Siddhatta Gotama
Buddha included.</p>
<p>My own preferred definition is much less ambitious and, I believe, much
more useful. Moreover, I believe it is what the people who originally
coined the word meant when they said it. An arahat is someone who has
come to the end of a particular developmental process. The process of
which I speak is familiar to anyone who has had a spiritual opening.
Once it is set in motion, there is a kind of visceral pull that propels
one to practice more. There is the feeling that one is moving
toward…something…one knows not what. But there is the pull. It will not
be denied, and ignore it at your peril. Almost all yogis know this pull.
But some yogis also know the end of it. These yogis are arahats.</p>
<p>An arahat is not a superman. An arahat is off the ride. Viewed through
this lens, the old stories suddenly make sense. According to the suttas
[Suttas (Pali) or sutras (Sanskrit) are the Buddhist scriptures that
record the oral teachings of the Buddha.], it was fairly routine for
someone to walk up to the Buddha and say something like “Done is what
needed to be done.” Why did they say it like that? Because that’s what
it feels like. How do I know? Because it happened to me on June 13th,
2004, while walking under a pepper tree in New Mexico. A circuit was
completed that day. A palpable energy that had been working its way
through my body for 22 years completed its circuit and has been
recycling ever since, stable, without any sense that anything else needs
to be done.</p>
<p>It would be impossible to overstate what a profound change this caused
in my understanding of my own life. The pull I spoke of earlier, the
sense of “being on a ride,” and needing to see it through to its
conclusion, had formed the backdrop for nearly my entire adult life.
Suddenly, it was over. What should I do now? At the very least, I would
have to find another project. All of this was clear in a moment. I
chuckled, turned to an imaginary Buddha standing next to me and said,
“Done is what needed to be done. You got nothin’ on me now.” I
understood that there was not, had never been a Buddha outside of me. I
was finally free… and yet it wasn’t me. It was just a constellation of
thoughts and sensations conveniently designated Kenneth.</p>
<p>There is infinite opportunity for misunderstanding here, so I want to be
as clear as possible. Being done refers only to the attainment of a
particular landmark along a natural developmental continuum. It does not
mean, contrary to hyperbolic legend, that the arahat has “erased all
karma,” “perfected him or herself,” etc. Those are children’s stories,
told by charlatans or starry-eyed apologists (or pre-industrial
quasi-biographers who depended on mythic deeds as a vehicle for their
stories).</p>
<p>Simply being enlightened will not magically transform you into a
glow-in-the-dark saint. It won’t necessarily even make you a good
person. The evidence for this is all around us, as we see that it is not
exceptional, but rather the norm, for enlightened teachers to get caught
with their pants down. If we were to give up our childish expectations
of saintly behavior from our sages, we would not have to feign surprise
when they succumb to the same human temptations that plague the rest of
us.</p>
<p>I understand that many will not accept my definition of enlightenment.
They will mumble something about “higher standards” and go on believing
in superheroes. But I think there may be some who are ready to take a
mature and realistic look at what enlightenment can and cannot do for us
as individuals and as a society. For them, the empowerment of knowing
that enlightenment, even to the level of arahat, is possible, will
outweigh the disappointment of having to give up the fantasy of infinite
wisdom, moral perfection, and steady-state bliss.</p>
</section>
<section id="full-circle">
<h2><span class="section-number">1.9. </span>Full Circle</h2>
<p>After my New Mexico retreat, I drove to Barre, MA, and worked at Insight
Meditation Society on and off for about a year and a half in the
maintenance and IT departments. Almost immediately after arriving at
IMS, I met my wife, Beth, who worked in the retreat center as a cook. My
chronic depression, which had left me dysfunctional for months at a time
throughout my adult life, was gone, and I no longer felt the need to
subordinate everything else to my spiritual quest. I was able to get my
life together. I went back to school and earned a bachelor’s degree in
Spanish literature and culture, and a master’s degree in second language
education, both from the State University of New York. While still in
school, I began teaching meditation over Skype and I’ve since become a
full-time meditation teacher, making my living doing something I enjoy
and passionately believe in. Beth and I stayed together, and were
married in 2008. The relief that comes from having gotten off the ride
isn’t what I thought it would be; it is not a cosmic bliss-out or a
perpetual beatific smile, but rather a deep, abiding sense of peace, and
the feeling that there’s no longer anything missing from my life or the
universe. This doesn’t prevent my taking on projects, having goals and
motivations and seeing them through, or caring about my life and the
people and things around me. Nor does it erase the difficulties of an
ordinary human life. Life continues as before, but with less sting.
Contentment underlies all, much as the deep sea underlies the froth on
the surface of the waves. Even the most violent storms do not disturb
those depths.</p>
<p>No description of awakening is adequate. If you get there, you will be
surprised, no matter what you hear or read in the meantime. In response
to my questions about enlightenment during the early years of my
practice, Bill Hamilton used to say, “Highly recommended. Can’t tell you
why.” I’ll end my story here, not because my story has ended, but
because it hasn’t; my story is ongoing and will not tidily fit within
these pages. Indeed, my life has changed as much in the last nine years
(since that day in the desert) as in any nine-year period of my life. I
have not retired or put myself out to pasture. I teach, learn, meditate,
spend time with my wife, family, and community, and run a business. But
my purpose in teaching meditation is not to make clones of myself; I see
contemplative fitness as analogous to physical fitness. Every individual
is unique. Your contemplative fitness will be your own. There is no
universal ideal, and no predetermined outcome.</p>
<p>If you want to be strong, lift weights. If you want to be well-educated,
go to school. If you want to awaken, meditate. The rest of this book
will show you how.</p>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>